The Project Gutenberg eBook of Money and trade considered, by John
Law

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Money and trade considered
       With a proposal for supplying the nation with money

Author: John Law

Release Date: May 17, 2023 [eBook #70784]

Language: English

Produced by: Emmanuel Ackerman, Evander Cobban and the Online
             Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
             file was produced from images generously made available by
             The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MONEY AND TRADE
CONSIDERED ***





                                 MONEY

                                  AND

                                 TRADE

                              CONSIDERED:

                     WITH A PROPOSAL FOR SUPPLYING
                         THE NATION WITH MONEY.

                  FIRST PUBLISHED AT EDINBURGH MDCCV.

                           BY THE CELEBRATED

                             JOHN LAW, ESQ;

                               AFTERWARD

                   DIRECTOR TO THE MISSISIPI COMPANY.


                                GLASGOW,

                   PRINTED AND SOLD BY R. & A. FOULIS

                                 MDCCL.




                      MONEY AND TRADE CONSIDERED.


There are several proposals offer’d to remedy the difficulties the
nation is under from the great scarcity of money.

That a right judgment may be made, which will be most safe,
advantageous and practicable; it seems necessary, 1. that the nature
of money be inquired into, and why silver was used as money preferable
to other goods. 2. that trade be considered, and how far money
affects trade. 3. that the measures have been used for preserving and
increasing money, and these now proposed, be examined.




                               CHAP. I.

 _How goods are valued. of barter. of silver; its value as a metal;
 its qualities fitting it for money; and of the additional value it
 received from being used as money._


Goods have a value from the uses they are applyed to; and their value
is greater or lesser, not so much from their more or less valuable,
or necessary uses, as from the greater or lesser quantity of them in
proportion to the demand for them. example; water is of great use, yet
of little value; because the quantity of water is much greater than the
demand for it. diamonds are of little use, yet of great value, because
the demand for diamonds is much greater, than the quantity of them.

Goods of the same kind differ in value, from any difference in their
quality, one horse is better than another horse. barley of one country
is better than barley of another country.

Goods change their value, from any change in their quantity, or in the
demand for them. if oats be in greater quantity than last year, and the
demand the same, or lesser, oats will be less valuable.

Mr. Locke says, the value of goods is according to their quantity in
proportion to their vent. the vent of goods cannot be greater than
the quantity, but the demand may be greater: if the quantity of wine
brought from France be a 100 ton, and the demand be for 500 ton, the
demand is greater than the vent; and the 100 ton will sell at a higher
price, than if the demand were only equal to the vent. so the prices of
goods are not according to the quantity in proportion to the vent, but
in proportion to the demand.

Before the use of money was known, goods were exchanged by barter, or
contract; and contracts were made payable in goods.

This state of barter was inconvenient, and disadvantageous. 1. he who
desired to barter would not always find people who wanted the goods he
had, and had such goods as he desired in exchange.

2. Contracts taken payable in goods were uncertain, for goods of the
same kind differed in value.

3. There was no measure by which the proportion of value goods had to
one another could be known.

In this state of barter there was little trade, and few arts-men. the
people depended on the landed-men. the landed-men laboured only so much
of the land as served the occasions of their families, to barter for
such necessaries as their land did not produce; and to lay up for seed
and bad years. what remained was unlaboured; or gifted on condition of
vassalage, and other services.

The losses and difficulties that attended barter, would force the
landed-men to a greater consumption of the goods of their own product,
and a lesser consumption of other goods; or to supply themselves,
they would turn the land to the product of the several goods they had
occasion for; tho’ only proper to produce of one kind. so, much of the
land was unlaboured, what was laboured was not employ’d to that by
which it would have turned to most advantage, nor the people to the
labour they were most fit for.

Silver as a metal had a value in barter, as other goods; from the uses
it was then apply’d to.

As goods of the same kind differ’d in value, so silver differ’d from
silver, as it was more or less fine.

Silver was lyable to a change in its value, as other goods, from any
change in its quantity, or in the demand for it.

Silver had qualities which fitted it for the use of money.

1. It could be brought to a standard in fineness, so was certain as to
its quality.

2. It was easie of delivery.

3. It was of the same value in one place that it was in another; or
differed little, being easie of carriage.

4. It could be kept without loss or expence; taking up little room, and
being durable.

5. It could be divided without loss, an ounce in four pieces, being
equal in value to an ounce in one piece.

Silver having these qualities, ’tis reasonable to think it was used as
money, before it was coined. what is meant by being used as money, is,
that silver in bullion was the measure by which goods were valued: the
value by which goods were exchanged: and in which contracts were made
payable.

He who had more goods than he had use for, would choose to barter
them for silver, tho’ he had no use for it; because, silver was
certain in it’s quality: it was easie of delivery: it could be kept
without loss or expence: and with it he could purchase other goods as
he had occasion, in whole or in part, at home or abroad, silver being
divisible without loss, and of the same value in different places. If
A. B. had 100 sheep, and desired to exchange them for horses; C. D.
had 10 horses, which were equal to, or worth the 100 sheep, and was
willing to exchange: but as A. B. had not present occasion for the
horses, rather than be at the expence of keeping them, he would barter
his sheep with E. F. who had the value to give in silver, with which he
could purchase the horses at the time he had occasion.

Or if E. F. had not silver, but was satisfied to give his bond for the
silver, or the horses, payable at the time A. B. wanted them; A. B.
would choose to take the bond payable in silver, rather than in horses:
because silver was certain in quality, and horses differed much. so
silver was used as the value in which contracts were made payable.

Silver was likewise used as the measure by which goods were valued,
because certain in quality. if A. B. had a 100 weight of lead, and
desired to exchange it for barley, the way to know what quantity of
barley was equal in value to the lead, was by the silver. if the 100
weight of lead was equal to five ounces of fine silver, and 5 ounces of
fine silver equal to 20 bolls of barley, then 20 bolls was the quantity
of barley to be given in exchange for the lead.

Silver being easie of carriage, so equal in one place to what it was
in another; was used as the measure by which goods to be delivered in
different places were valued. If a piece of wine was to be delivered
at Glasgow by A. B. merchant there, to the order of C. D. merchant in
Aberdeen: and the value to be delivered in oats at Aberdeen by C. D. to
the order of A. B. the wine could not be valued by the quantity of oats
it was worth at Glasgow, nor the oats by the quantity of wine they were
worth at Aberdeen. wine or oats might differ in quality, or be more
or less valuable at the one place than at the other. the way to have
known what quantity of oats was equal to the wine, was by the quantity
of silver each was worth at the places they were to be delivered. if
the piece of wine was worth at Glasgow 20 ounces of fine silver, and 20
ounces of fine silver worth 50 bolls of oats at Aberdeen; then 50 bolls
was the quantity of oats to be given there in return for the wine.

Silver being capable of a stamp, princes, for the greater convenience
of the people, set up mints to bring it to a standard, and stamp it;
whereby its weight and fineness was known, without the trouble of
weighing or fyning; but the stamp added nothing to the value.

For these reasons silver was used as money; its being coined was only a
consequence of its being applied to that use in bullion, tho’ not with
the same convenience.

Mr. Locke and others who have wrote on this subject, say, the general
consent of men placed an imaginary value upon silver, because of its
qualities fitting it for money.[1]

[1] Locke p. 31. upon interest, and p. 1. upon money.

I cannot conceive how different nations could agree to put an
imaginary value upon any thing, especially upon silver, by which all
other goods are valued; or that any one country would receive that as
a value, which was not valuable equal to what it was given for; or
how that imaginary value could have been kept up. but, suppose France
receiving silver at an imaginary value, other nations received it at
that value, because received so in France: then for the same reason a
crown passing in France for 76 Sols, should pass in Scotland for 76
pence, and in Holland for 76 Stivers. but on the contrair, even in
France where the crown is raised, ’tis worth no more than before when
at 60 Sols.

It is reasonable to think silver was barter’d as it was valued for
its uses as a mettal, and was given as money according to its value
in barter. the additional use of money silver was applied to would
add to its value, because as money it remedied the disadvantages and
inconveniencies of barter, and consequently the demand for silver
increasing, it received an additional value equal to the greater demand
its use as money occasioned.

And this additional value is no more imaginary, than the value silver
had in barter as a metal, for such value was because it served such
uses, and was greater or lesser according to the demand for silver as
a mettal, proportioned to its quantity. the additional value silver
received from being used as money, was because of its qualities which
fitted it for that use; and that value was according to the additional
demand its use as money occasioned.

If either of these values are imaginary, then all value is so, for
no goods have any value, but from the uses they are apply’d to, and
according to the demand for them, in proportion to their quantity.

Thus silver having a value, and qualities fitting it for money, which
other goods had not, was made money, and for the greater convenience of
the people was coined.

The names of the different pieces might have been number 1. number 2.
and so on; number 60 would have been the same as a crown; for the name
and stamp was only to certify, that the piece had such a quantity of
silver in it, of such a fineness.

Goods of any other kind that have the same qualities might then, and
may now be made money equal to their value. gold and copper may be made
money, but neither with so much convenience as silver. payments in
copper being inconvenient by reason of its bulk; and gold not being in
so great quantity as to serve the use of money. in countries where gold
is in great quantity, it is used as money; and where gold and silver
are scarce, copper is used.

Gold is coined for the more easie exchange of that metal, and copper to
serve in small payments; but silver is the measure by which goods are
valued, the value by which goods are exchanged, and in which contracts
are made payable.

As money encreased, the disadvantages and inconveniences of barter
were removed; the poor and idle were employed, more of the land was
laboured, the product encreased, manufactures and trade improved, the
landed-men lived better, and the people with less dependance on them.




                               CHAP. II.

 _Of Trade, and how far it depends on money. that the increase of the
 people depends on Trade. of exchange._


Trade is domestick, or foreign. domestick trade is the imployment of
the people, and the exchange of goods within the country.

Foreign trade has several branches.

1. The product and manufacture being more than the consumption, a part
is exported, and in return foreign goods are brought home.

2. Selling the goods exported at one port, and loading there to sell
another; whereby a greater return is made, than if the goods exported
had been carry’d directly there.

3. Bringing home the product and manufacture of other countries, from
whence, and when they are cheap; to supply countries where, and when
they are dear.

4. Bringing home the product of other countries, and exporting it in
manufacture.

5. Freighting, or hireing out ships.

Domestick and foreign trade may be carried on by barter; but not for so
great a value as by money, nor with so much convenience.

Domestick trade depends on the money. a greater quantity employs more
people than a lesser quantity. a limited sum can only set a number of
people to work proportioned to it, and ’tis with little success laws
are made, for imploying the poor or idle in countries where money is
scarce; good laws may bring the money to the full circulation ’tis
capable of, and force it to those employments that are most profitable
to the country: but no laws can make it go further, nor can more people
be set to work, without more money to circulate so, as to pay the wages
of a greater number. they may be brought to work on credit, and that is
not practicable, unless the credit have a circulation, so as to supply
the workman with necessaries; if that’s supposed, then that credit is
money, and will have the same effects, on home, and foreign trade.

An addition to the money adds to the value of the country. so long
as money gives interest, it is imployed; and money imployed brings
profit, tho’ the imployer loses. if 50 men are set to work, to whom 25
shillings is payed per day, and the improvement made by their labour be
only equal to, or worth 15 s. yet by so much the value of the country
is increased. but as it is reasonable to suppose their labour equal
to 40. s. so much is added to the value of the country, of which the
imployer gains 15 s. 15 may be supposed to equal the consumption of the
labourers, who before lived on charity, and 10 s. remains to them over
their consumption.

If a stone of wooll is worth 10 s. and made into cloth worth 2 pound;
the product is improved to four times the value it had in wooll:
the workmen may be supposed to consume more than when they were not
imployed; allow one 4th, the nation is gainer double the value of the
product. so an addition to the money, whether the imployer gains or
not, adds to the national wealth, eases the country of a number of poor
or idle, proportioned to the money added, enables them to live better,
and to bear a share in the publick with the other people.

The first branch of foreign trade, which is the export and import of
goods, depends on the money. if one half of the people are imployed,
and the whole product and manufacture consumed; more money, by
imploying more people, will make an overplus to export: if then the
goods imported ballance the goods exported, a greater addition to the
money will imploy yet more people, or the same people before employed
to more advantage; which by making a greater, or more valuable export,
will make a ballance due. so if the money lessens, a part of the people
then imployed are set idle, or imployed to less advantage; the product
and manufacture is less, or less valuable, the export of consequence
less, and a ballance due to foreigners.

The 2d and 3d branches of foreign trade, called the trades of carriage;
are monopolized out of Europe, by these countries who have colonies;
and in Europe, by these who sell cheapest.

Scotland has advantages for trade by which the merchants might
undersell merchants in Holland, as cheapness of living, paying less to
the publick, having workmen, seamen, and provisions for victualling
cheaper: but if the Dutch merchant’s stock is 10000 lib. and his yearly
expence 500; he can trade at 10 per cent profit, and add yearly 500
lib. to his stock. whereas a Scots merchant, whose stock is 500 lib.
and his yearly expence 50; cannot trade so cheap.

If ’tis ask’t how a Dutch merchant trades who has only 500 lib. stock?
he restricts his expence so as he can afford to trade at 10 per cent
profit: or money being in greater quantity in Holland, whereby it is
easier borrowed, and at less use; he gets credit for more at 3 or 4 per
cent, by which he gains 6 or 7. and unless money be in greater quantity
in Scotland, or expence retrench’d, we cannot trade so cheap as the
Dutch; tho’ we have advantages for trade that they have not, and tho’
they be under disadvantages we are not lyable to. by a greater quantity
of money and oeconomy, the Dutch monopolize the trades of carriage even
from the English.

The 4th branch of foreign trade, bringing home the product of other
countries, and exporting it in manufacture, depends on the quantity of
money. we are so far from competing with the Dutch in this trade, that
our wooll was sent to Holland, and imported from thence in manufacture;
under the difficulty of a prohibition on the export of the wooll,
and on the import of the manufacture. yet besides the advantages
already named, which we have for trade over the Dutch, the material
is the product of our country, and greater privileges are granted to
manufacturers here, than in Holland.

’Tis alledged, if the prohibition had continued, manufactures might
have come to perfection.

The advantage some men made by manufacture, may have occasion’d the
setting up of more, while the money has been diminishing; but that
money so imployed, has been taken from some other use it was before
imploy’d in: for money cannot serve in two places at one time.

’Tis alledged, that the allowing the wooll to be exported, occasioned
the exportation of the money. that at one time 5000 lib. was sent to
England to buy wooll. ’tis askt what became of that wooll? they answer,
it was sent to France for wine. then, as 5000 lib. of English wooll may
be worth 8 or 10 thousand pound in France; so the 5000 lib. sent to
England, saved the sending out of 8 or 10000 lib. to France.

To those who don’t throughly examine the state of this country, it may
seem odd that wooll should be allowed by law to be exported: but if the
product of Scotland cannot be manufactur’d with less than 50000 people,
and the money that can be spar’d to manufacture, be only capable to
employ 25000, one half of the product will be lost if it is not allowed
to be exported.

The 5th branch, the freighting or hireing out ships, depends on the
money, and the other branches of trade. where ships are in use to be
freighted by strangers, and supported by a great demand for their own
trade; there all sorts of ships are to be hired cheaper than in other
places; and merchants are sure of such ships as are proper for the
goods they load with, and the countries they trade to.

This trade of freighting brings the goods of other countries to
Holland, tho’ design’d for sale elsewhere. if woollen manufacture from
England to Portugal yields 25 per cent profit, and to Holland 15; the
English merchant will choose to fend such goods to Holland for 15 per
cent, rather than to Portugal for 25; and the Dutch merchant who is
able to trade cheaper, from the cheapness of freight, etc. is satisfied
for the other 10 to carry to Portugal.

Most authors who have wrote on trade divide it into national and
private. they say, a merchant may gain where the nation loses. if a
1000 lib. is exported to the Indies in money or bullion, and a 1000
lib. in goods or provisions; the return worth 8000 lib. the merchant
gains 6000; but as these goods are all consumed in the country, the
nation loses the 1000 lib. money or bullion exported.

They don’t consider whether the 8000 lib. of goods imported (all
supposed to be consum’d in the country) does not lessen the consumption
of the product or manufacture of the country, so as to occasion an
addition to the export, at least equal to the 1000 lib. money or
bullion exported. but allowing they do not lessen the consumption of
the goods of the country, and the use of them be not at all necessary;
yet these goods being worth 8000 lib. at home or abroad, the nation
gains 6000. if the people consume them, and in extravagant uses, that’s
not the fault of the trade, nor for that reason should that trade be
call’d disadvantageous; it is the fault of the government, who ought to
hinder the too great consumption of foreign goods; especially, such as
might be wanted without causing a greater consumption of the goods of
the country, that care being taken, by making the vent less profitable
at home, than abroad; merchants would export them, or for the future
lessen the import.

If East-India goods that sell for a 1000 lib. in England, are only
worth abroad 800 lib, the duty payed at their entry being return’d, and
more given as a draw-back to encourage the export, their vent abroad
will be more profitable than in England.

A people may consume more of their own or foreign goods, than the
value of the product, manufacture, and profits by trade; but their
trade is not disadvantageous, it is their too great consumption:
and the too great consumption of the product and manufacture of the
country, may be as hurtful as that of foreign goods; for, if so much
is consumed, that the remainder exported won’t pay the consumption of
foreign goods, a ballance will be due, and that ballance will be sent
out in money or bullion.

A nation may gain where the merchant loses, but wherever the merchant
gains, the nation gains equal, and so much more, as the maintenance and
wages of the people employ’d and the duty on the goods amounts to. if a
ship insur’d is lost, the nation loses, and the merchant loses nothing;
but in that case the insurer is the merchant, and loses equal to the
nation.

As trade depends on money, so the encrease or decrease of the people
depends on trade. if they have employment at home, they are kept at
home: and if the trade is greater than serves to employ the people, it
brings more from places where they are not employ’d. Sir William Petty
values a man at 20 years purchase, by that computation a seaman whose
wages is forty shil. a month, is valued 480 lib.

Scotland has a very inconsiderable trade, because she has but a very
small part of the money. there is a little home trade, but the country
is not improv’d, nor the product manufactur’d. there is a little of
the first branch of foreign trade, and that is carried on with great
disadvantage to the people, who pay dearer for most foreign goods, and
are worse serv’d, than other nations: if they have any cheaper, ’tis
from the lower duty on the import. in Scotland low prices are given
for goods bought up to be exported, the merchants profit being great:
if a 100 stone of wooll is worth in Holland ten piece of linen cloth,
these ten pieces are sold in Scotland for the value of a 180 or 200
stone of such wooll. such goods as do not yield that great profit, are
not exported; and these that do, are not exported in any quantity,
the merchant’s stock being small. Scotland has no part of the other
branches of foreign trade, not being able to trade so cheap as other
nations.

Some think if interest were lower’d by law, trade would increase,
merchants being able to employ more money and trade cheaper. such a
law would have many inconveniencies, and it is much to be doubted,
whether it would have any good effect; indeed, if lowness of interest
were the consequence of a greater quantity of money, the stock apply’d
to trade would be greater, and merchants would trade cheaper, from the
easiness of borrowing and the lower interest of money, without any
inconveniencies attending it.

Tho’ interest were at 3 per cent in Holland, and continued at 6 in
Scotland; if money were to be had equal to the demands at 6, the
advantages we have for trade, which the Dutch have not, would enable us
to extend trade to its other branches, notwithstanding the difference
of interest.

If money in Scotland were equal to the demands at 6 per cent, the
Dutch could not trade so cheap in herring; the hinderances of that
trade being the consequences of the scarcity of money. the materials
for carrying on the fishing are cheaper in Holland, but the cheapness
of victualling alone would ballance that. and the dearth of these
materials, as of other foreign goods, coming from the scarcity of
money; that being remeded, these materials, and other foreign goods
that are not the product of Holland, would be sold as cheap in Scotland.

Exchange, is when a merchant exports to a greater value than he
imports, and has money due abroad; another importing to a greater value
than he exported, has occasion for money abroad: this last by paying in
money to the other, of the weight and fineness with that is due him, or
to that value, saves the trouble, hazard, and expence, to himself of
sending money out, to the other of bringing money home, and to both the
expence of re-coyning.

So long as foreign trade, and expence kept equal, exchange was at
the par: but when a people imported for a greater value, or had other
occasions abroad, more than their export, and the expence of foreigners
among them would ballance; there was a necessity of sending out the
ballance in money or bullion, and the merchant or gentleman who owed,
or had occasion for money abroad, to save the trouble, expence and
hazard of sending it out, gave so much per cent to another, as the
trouble, expence and hazard was valued at. thus exchange rose above the
par, and became a trade.

Mr. Mun on trade, page 100, says, the exchange being against a nation,
is of advantage to that nation. and supposes, if a 100 lib. at London
is worth no more than 90 lib. of the same money at Amsterdam, the
Dutch to send 500000 lib. of goods to England, and the English 400000
lib. of goods to Holland; it follows, that the money due the English
at Amsterdam, will ballance 440000 lib. due to the Dutch at London:
so 60000 lib. pays the ballance. Mr. Mun does not consider, that the
Dutch goods worth 500000 lib. when exchange was at the par, are worth
at London 555555 l. when 90 lib. at Amsterdam is worth a 100 lib. at
London. and the 400000 lib. of English goods in Holland, are only worth
360000 lib. that sum being equal by exchange to 400000 lib. in England.
so in place of England’s having an advantage of 40000 lib. as he
alledges by the exchange being against her: she pays 95555 lib. more,
than if exchange had been at the par.

When exchange is above the par, it is not only payed for the sums due
of ballance, but affects the whole exchange to the place where the
ballance is due. if the ballance is 20000 lib. and the sums exchanged
by merchants who have money abroad, with others who are owing, or have
occasion for money there, be 60000 lib. the bills for the 60000 lib.
are sold at or near the same price, with the 20000 lib. of ballance.

It likewise affects the exchange to countries where no ballance is due.
if the exchange betwixt Scotland and Holland is 3 per cent. above the
par against Scotland, betwixt England and Holland at the par, tho’ no
ballance is due by Scotland to England, yet the exchange with England
will rise; for, a 100 lib. in England remitted to Scotland by Holland,
will yield 103 lib. so betwixt Scotland and England it may be supposed
to be had at 2 per cent, being less trouble than to remit by Holland.

Goods are sold to foreigners, according to the first cost. if goods
worth a 100 lib. in Scotland, are worth 130 lib. in England, these
goods will be exported, 30 per cent being supposed enough for the
charges and profit. if the price of these goods lower in Scotland from
a 100 lib. to 80, the price in England will not continue at a 130; it
will lower proportionably, for either Scots merchants will undersell
one another, or English merchants will export these goods themselves.
so if they rise in Scotland from a 100 lib. to 120; they will rise
proportionably in England, unless the English can be served with these
goods cheaper from other places, or can supply the use of them with
goods of another kind. this being supposed, it follows that,

By so much as exchange is above the par, so much all goods exported
are sold cheaper, and all goods imported are sold dearer than before.
if a merchant send goods yearly to England first cost, charges and
profit 6000 lib. money in England of the same standard with money in
Scotland, and no ballance due; but a ballance due to Holland, raising
the exchange 3 per cent above the par to Holland, and affecting the
exchange to England 2 per cent, 5882 lib. 7 sh. in England pays the
goods, that sum by exchange being equal to 6000 lib. in Scotland.
so that a ballance due to Holland, by raising the exchange to other
countries, occasions a loss to Scotland of 117 lib. 13 sh. on the value
of 6000 lib. of goods sent to England.

English goods are sold so much dearer. if an English merchant sends
goods yearly to Scotland, first cost, charges and profit 6000 lib. 6120
lib. must be payed for these goods in Scotland, being only equal to
6000 lib. in England. if the exchange had been at the par, the Scots
goods sent to England would have sold 117 lib. 14 sh. more, and the
English goods sent to Scotland 120 lib. less.

Thus to all places with whom exchange is above the par, goods sent out
are sold so much less, and goods brought from thence are sold so much
dearer, as the exchange is above the par; whether sent out, or brought
in, by Scots or foreign merchants.

The merchant who deals in English goods gains no more than when
exchange was at the par, tho’ he sells dearer; nor the merchant who
deals in Scots goods less, tho’ he sells cheaper; they have both the
same profit as when exchange was at the par. Scotland pays 2 per cent
more for English goods, and England 2 per cent less for Scots goods:
all, or a great part of the loss falls at last on the landed man in
Scotland, and it is the landed man in England has all, or a great part
of the benefit.

Nations finding the export of money or bullion to pay the ballance
due by trade, a loss of so much riches, and very hurtful to trade,
might have discharged the import of such goods as the people could
best want; or laid a duty on them, such as might have lessen’d their
consumption: they might have given encouragement to industry, whereby
the product would have been encreas’d and improv’d, or discouraged
extravagant consumption, whereby the overplus to export would have
been greater; any one of these methods would have brought trade and
exchange equal, and have made a ballance due them: but in place of
these measures, they prohibit bullion and money to be exported, which
could not well have any other effect, than to raise the exchange equal
to the hazard, such laws added to the export of money or bullion, which
may be supposed 3 per cent more: and as these laws by such effect were
hurtful, making all goods exported sell yet 3 per cent cheaper, and all
goods imported 3 per cent dearer; the stricter they were execute, the
higher the exchange rose, and the more they did hurt. the ballance was
still sent out in money or bullion, by the merchant who owed it, by the
banker who gave the bills, or by the foreigner to whom it was due.

Suppose the money of Scotland, England, and Holland of the same weight
and fineness. Scotland to trade with no other places. the exchange
at the par. the yearly export from Scotland, first cost 300000 lib.
charges and profit 30 per cent. goods imported 280000 lib. charges and
profit 30 per cent. one half of the trade to be carried on by Scots
merchants, the other half by English and Dutch.

  Due to Scotland for one half   }
of the export carried out by     } 195000
their own merchants ----         }

  Due for the other half carried }        }
out by English and Dutch.        } 150000 } 345000

  Due by Scotland to England     }
and Holland for goods imported   } 182000
by English and Dutch.--          }

  Due for goods imported by      }        }
Scots merchants ---- ----        } 140000 } 322000

The expense of Scots-men abroad, more than of foreigners in Scotland,
40000 lib. if this is supposed the yearly state of the trade and
expense of Scotland, there will be a ballance due of 17000 lib. and
unless the Scots retrench the consumption of foreign goods, so as to
import less; or retrench the consumption of their own goods, so as to
export more; or increase, or improve their product, so as the export
be greater or more valuable; or retrench in their expence abroad.
since that ballance must be paid it will go out in money or bullion:
and occasions the exchange to rise 3 per cent, the prohibition on
the export of money 3 more, if Scots-men export it, the Nation saves
the 1020 l. exchange on the 170000 of ballance due, which is lost if
English merchants export it; but the loss such a rise in exchange
occasions on the goods, is more considerable. the 195000 lib. due
abroad for goods sent out of Scotland by Scots merchants, will be
payed with 183962 lib. English or Dutch money, that sum being equal by
exchange at 6 per cent to 195000 lib. in Scotland. the 150000 lib. due
for first cost of goods carried out by English or Dutch merchants, will
be payed with 141510 lib. English or Dutch money, that sum being equal
to 150000 lib. in Scotland. the 182000 lib. due by Scotland for goods
imported by English and Dutch merchants, will come to 192920 lib. in
Scotland. and the 140000 lib. first cost of goods brought home by Scots
merchants, will come to 148400 lib. in Scotland. so the accompt will
run thus.

  Due to Scotland for goods exported   183962
  Brought from abroad first cost       140000
  Ballance of expence abroad            40000
                                       ------
  Due to Scotland abroad                 3962
                                       ------

  Due by Scotland for goods imported }
by English and Dutch                 } 192920

  English and Dutch take back in goods 150000
                                       ------
  Due to English and Dutch in Scotland  42920
                                       ------
  3962 lib. due abroad to Scotland in }
Scots money                           }  4199

  Remains due by Scotland.              38721

So the rise in the exchange of 3 per cent by the ballance due of 17000
lib. and 3 more by the prohibition on the export of money, occasions a
loss to Scotland of 21721 l. and makes the next year’s ballance 38721
lib. tho’ the trade be the same as before. of which 21721 lib. lost by
exchange, one half would be saved if money were allowed to be exported.

Since the exchange being 6 per cent above the par, occasions the loss
of 21721 lib. then raising the money 8 and a one third per cent, having
raised the exchange with England to 14 per cent, and with Holland to
30, makes the loss proportionably greater: Scots goods being supposed
to continue at the same prices they were sold for, before the money was
raised, or not to rise in the same proportion with the money. for when
exchange was at the par, a 100 lib. of Scots goods were sold abroad for
a 130 lib. English money; but 114 lib. English money, being now equal
by exchange to a 130 lib. in Scotland, the Scots merchant can afford to
sell the same quantity of goods for a 114 lib. that he sold before at
a 130, and have the same profit. so foreign goods worth abroad a 100
lib. and sold in Scotland for a 130 lib. when exchange was at the par;
cannot be sold now for less than a 150 lib. in Scotland, that sum being
only equal to a 130 lib. English money; and the merchant’s profit is no
greater, than when he sold the same quantity of goods for a 130 lib.

It may not be improper to consider what consequences would attend
the lowering the money to the English standard, and allowing it to be
exported.

The former state of trade I have supposed to be carried on, one half by
Scots merchants, the other half by English and Dutch; but as most of
the trade is carried on by Scots merchants, I shall suppose this state
of trade accordingly. the one or the other will clear the matter in
question.

The state of trade now, and exchange supposed at 15 per cent to
England, and 30 to Holland. the whole export of Scotland to be 300000
lib. of which 250000 lib. carried out by Scots merchants, sold at 30
per cent profit and charges 325000 lib.

  In English money                    282608

  Exported by foreigners for 50000l. }
in English money                     } 43478
                                      ------
                  The whole export    326086

Goods imported                        306086
Spent abroad.                          40000
                                      ------
      Due of ballance by Scotland.     20000

Money being lowered to the English standard, and allow’d by law to be
exported; will bring the exchange with England to 2 or 3 per cent, and
with Holland to 17 or 18, notwithstanding of the ballance due. for, as
a 100 lib. in Edinburgh, would then be equal to 100 lib. at London,
and being allowed to be exported; none would give above 102, or 3 here
for a 100 lib. at London: because the trouble and charge of sending it
to London, would be valued no higher. the export, import, and expence
abroad supposed to continue the same; a ballance would then be due to
Scotland.

The state of trade, exchange at 3 percent to England, and
proportionably to other places.

  Due in English money, for 325000l.          }
first cost, charges and profit of goods sent  } 315534
out by Scots merchants.                       }

  Due in English money, for 50000l.           }
of goods exported by foreigners.              }  48544
                                                ------
                The whole export                364078
                                                ------

  Of this deduce the value of goods imported. } 306086
  And the expence abroad.                     }  40000
                                                ------
  There will be a ballance due to Scotland,   }
    of                                        }  17992

As this ballance due to Scotland, would bring exchange to the par,
and 3 per cent on the Scots side; 3 more, because money in England is
prohibited to be exported; 100 lib. in Scotland, would be worth 106
lib. in England, and proportionably in other places. so the state of
trade would then be thus.

  Due in English money for 325000l.     }
first cost, charges and profit of Scots } 397500
goods sent out by Scots merchants, and  }
50000l. exported by foreigners.         }

  Of this spent abroad.                 }  40000
  Imported from abroad.                 } 306086
                                          ------
      Ballance then due to Scotland.       51414

If the yearly export be as great as I suppose it, and the ballance only
20000 pounds; then lowering the money to the English standard, will
make a ballance due of 51414 lib. tho’ the money is not allowed to be
exported.

It may be objected, that such an alteration in the exchange, lowering
the value of foreign money; might hinder the sale of our goods abroad.
for, linen-cloth bought in Scotland for a 100 lib. and sold at London
for a 115 lib. yields by exchange 31 per cent profit. but if exchange
were 6 per cent on the Scots side, the profit is only 9 per cent.

It is answered. if an English merchant takes bills on Scotland for a
1000 lib. to lay out on linen-cloth, the exchange then at the par: the
linen-cloth is sold in England according to the first cost, charges and
usual profit. next year the exchange is on the English side, the linen
is sold in England cheaper than before. the third year exchange returns
to the par, the linen is then sold in England as the first year. if the
first cost of linen is dearer, the consumer pays the more for it, the
merchant’s profit is the same.

All nations endeavour to get the exchange as much as they can on their
side. the exchange from Holland to England is 12 or 15 per cent, to
Scotland 30 per cent, to France 40 or 50, sometimes more; yet Dutch
goods sell in these countries, the merchant has his profit the same as
when exchange was lower, the consumer pays more for them. English cloth
is sold at Paris from 18 to 20 livres the French ell. when the lued’ore
is at 12 livres, from 20 to 23, when the lued’ore is at 14 livres:
because the exchange to England is dearer, in proportion as the French
money is rais’d.

Most goods sent from Scotland are such as foreigners won’t want,
tho’ they payed 10 or 20 per cent more for them. we have an example
of this in the wooll. during the prohibition, wooll sold in Holland
and France for double the first cost, now it has fallen to 30 or 40
per cent profit. prices are given for goods, according to their first
cost, charges, and usual profit; where prohibitions are, the hazard
of exporting contrair to law is valued. wooll is of less value now
in Holland than in time of peace, because the vent of their woollen
manufacture is less; but tho’ wooll were as valuable in Holland as
before, and tho’ a Dutch manufacturer would give 200 lib. for wooll
that cost only a 100 lib. in Scotland, rather than want it: yet as
he knows the prohibition is taken off, and that the Scots merchants
can afford to sell cheaper; he won’t buy unless he can have it at a
reasonable profit. so either the Scots merchants bring down the price,
by under-selling one another; or the Dutch merchant commissions it
himself. if a duty were put on such goods whose value abroad would bear
it, the merchant would gain the same, ’tis the foreigner pays the duty.

Besides, lowering the money may not lower the prices abroad. for,
as when money was raised, goods may have rose in proportion, or have
been made worse; so as a 100 lib. after the money is lower’d will have
33 crowns and 1/8 more silver in it, than a 100 lib. had before; so a
greater quantity of goods may be bought with a 100 lib. than before,
or the goods may be made better: especially the linen-cloth, since
the material would be imported for less. but, allowing that upon the
lowering the money, goods sold in Scotland as before, and were made
no better; and allowing that one third or more of the goods exported,
could not be raised in their prices abroad; because foreigners might be
served cheaper with the same kind of goods from other places, or might
supply the use of them with goods of another kind; or might consume
less of them; yet, that ought not to hinder such a regulation of the
money and exchange; for a draw-back might be given upon the export
of such goods, whose prices abroad were not great enough to yield a
reasonable profit.

But lest such an alteration in the exchange, or undervaluing foreign
money, should lessen the export of goods: it may not be adviseable,
unless a fund were given, out of which draw-backs might be payed to
encourage export, and an addition be made to the money, whereby the
people may be set to work. for without some addition to the money, ’tis
not to be supposed next year’s export can be equal to the last: it
will lessen as money has lessened; a part of the people then imployed
being now idle; not for want of inclination to work, or for want of
imployers, but for want of money to imploy them with.




                              CHAP. III.

 _Of the different measures which have been used to preserve and
 increase money. and of banks._


The measures have been used to preserve and increase money, have in
some countries been opposite to what has been used in others: and
opposite measures have been used in the same countries, without any
differing circumstances to occasion them.

Some countries have raised money in the denomination, when others
have lowered it; some have allay’d it, when others who had allay’d
it have rectified it; some have prohibited the export of money under
severest penalties, when others have by law allowed it to be exported;
some thinking to add to the money, have obliged traders to bring home
bullion, in proportion to the goods they imported. most countries have
tryed some or all of these measures, and others of the same nature,
and have tryed contrary measures at one time, from what they used
immediately before, from the opinion, that since the method used had
not the effect designed, a contrary would: yet it has not been found,
that any of them have preserved or increased money; but on the contrair.

The use of banks has been the best method yet practised for the
increase of money. banks have been long used in Italy, but as I am
informed, the invention of them was owing to Sweedland. their money
was copper, which was inconvenient, by reason of its weight and bulk;
to remedy this inconveniency, a bank was set up where the money might
be pledged, and credit given to the value, which past in payments, and
facilitate trade.

The Dutch for the same reason set up the bank of Amsterdam. their money
was silver, but their trade was so great as to find payments even in
silver inconvenient. this bank like that of Sweedland, is a secure
place, where merchants may give in money, and have credit to trade
with. besides the convenience of easier and quicker payments, these
banks save the expence of casheers, the expence of bags and carriage,
losses by bad money, and the money is safer than in the merchants
houses, for ’tis less lyable to fire or robbery, the necessary measures
being taken to prevent them.

Merchants who have money in the bank of Amsterdam, and people of other
countries who deal with them, are not lyable to the changes in the
money, by its being allay’d or altered in the denomination: for, the
bank receives no money but what’s of value, and is therefore called
bank-money; and tho’ raised in current payments, it goes for the value
it was pledged for in bank-payments. the AG O of the bank changes a
quarter or a half p. cent, as current money is more or less scarce.

Banks where the money is pledg’d equal to the credit given, are sure;
for, tho’ demands are made of the whole, the bank does not fail in
payment.

By the constitution of this bank, the whole sum for which credit is
given, ought to remain there, to be ready at demand; yet a sum is lent
by the managers for a stock to the lumbar, and ’tis thought they lend
great sums on other occasions. so far as they lend they add to the
money, which brings a profit to the country, by imploying more people,
and extending trade; they add to the money to be lent, whereby it is
easier borrowed, and at less use; and the bank has a benefit: but the
bank is less sure, and tho’ none suffer by it, or are apprehensive of
danger, its credit being good; yet if the whole demands were made,
or demands greater than the remaining money, they could not all be
satisfied, till the bank had called in what sums were lent.

The certain good it does, will more than ballance the hazard, tho’ once
in two or three years it failed in payment; providing the sums lent be
well secured: merchants who had money there, might be disappointed of
it at demand, but the security being good, and interest allowed; money
would be had on a small discount, perhaps at the par.

Last war, England set up a bank to have the conveniencies of that at
Amsterdam, and by their constitution to increase money. this bank was
made up of subscribers, who lent the King 1200000 lib. at 8 and a third
per cent, for 11 years, on a parliamentary fund; and were priviledged
bankers for that time. the sum due by the government was a security to
the people, to make good any losses the bank might suffer.

This bank was safer than the gold-smiths notes in use before. it made
a great addition to the money, having a much greater sum of notes out,
than money in bank. and the sum lent the King, which was the fund
belonged to the subscribers, was negotiated at profit, and had the same
effect in trade as money. I don’t know how their notes came to be at
discount, whether from the circumstances of the nation, or from ill
management.

The fund of the bank of Scotland was a 100000 l. of which a tenth was
payed in. this bank was safer than that of England, there being a
register whereby most sums lent were secured. its notes went for 4 or
5 times the value of the money in bank, and by so much as these notes
went for more than the money in bank; so much was added to the money of
the nation.

This bank was more useful than that of Amsterdam, or England; its notes
passing in most payments, and through the whole country: the bank of
Amsterdam being only for that town, and that of England of little use
but at London.

The stop of payments which happened to the bank of Scotland, was
foreseen, and might have been prevented. the consumption of foreign
goods, and expence in England, being more than the export of goods did
pay; the ballance sent out in money lessened the credit of the bank.
for as credit is voluntary, it depends on the quantity of money in
the country, and increases or decreases with it. coyning notes of one
pound supported the bank, by furnishing paper for small payments, and
thereby preventing a part of the demand for money: by these notes the
bank might have kept its credit, till other methods had been taken to
supply the country with money; had not a report of raising the money
occasioned an extraordinary demand, which in few days exhausted the
money in bank, and put a stop to payments.

It would not have been easie in that scarcity of money to have got
enough to support the bank, tho’ men of the best credit had undertaken
it; that report of raising the money having only occasioned a demand
from the people in Edinburgh. in a short time notes would have come in
so fast from the country, that what money could have been got, would
not have answered the demand.

If the privy council had lowered the money, the English crown to 5s.
and the other money in proportion, to take place 2 pence p. crown in
3 days, and the other 3 pence in a month; the occasion of the demand
being removed, in all appearance money would have been returned to the
bank.

If the state of the bank had been known, or suspected by the people;
such a proclamation would have had the same effect, tho’ the stop of
payment had then happen’d. in that case, the support of the bank might
have been the narrative of the proclamation; the security being good,
few or none would have kept their money to loss, rather than return
it to the bank. and if in 3 days money had not come in so fast as
expected, their lordships by a 2d. proclamation might have lowered the
crown to 5 sh. to take place then, and 6 pence more in 3 days. when the
credit of the bank had been re-established, the money might have been
cryed up, if that had been necessary, the crown to 5 sh. and 5 pence,
and the other money in proportion as it was before.

Some are against all banks where the money does not lie pledged equal
to the credit. 1. they say the demand may be greater than the money in
bank. secondly, if we are declining in our trade, or money, we are not
at all, or are less sensible of it: and if the bank fail, we are in a
worse condition than before.

To the first it’s answered, Tho’ the nation had no benefit by the
addition the bank makes to the money; nor the people by being supply’d
with money when otherwise they could not, and at less interest; and
tho’ the proprietors had no gain by it: the other conveniencies, as
quicker and easier payments, &c. are more than equal to that hazard; or
bank notes, gold-smiths and bankers notes, would not be preferred to
money, every body knowing such a stop may happen to the bank, and that
gold-smiths and bankers may fail.

The other objection is the same as to say, a merchant who had a small
stock, and was capable of imploying a greater; if a sum were offered
him without interest, equal to what he had, and more as his own
increased, should refuse it, because he might fancy himself richer than
he was, and if his own stock decreased, that sum lent would be taken
from him.

If 15000 is supposed the money in bank, and 75000 lib. of notes out;
60000 lib. is added to the money of the nation, without interest: for
what is payed by the borrowers, is got by the proprietors. as the money
of the nation increases, the credit of the bank increases, and the
sum of notes out is greater; and so far from making the people less
sensible of the condition of the country, a surer judgment of the state
of trade and money may be made from the books of the bank, than any
other way.

If trade can be carried on with a 100000 lib. and a ballance then due
by foreigners; the same measures, and a greater quantity of money,
would make the ballance greater. nor is that additional money the bank
furnishes, to be supposed will be lost, if by a ballance due from trade
the silver money increases: that credit may fail from an accident when
money is plentiful, and would soon be recover’d; ’tis only lost by a
scarcity of money. such a credit may support trade, in cases where
without it trade would sink, but cannot do prejudice.

Another objection is made against the bank. that it encouraged the
exportation of money, by furnishing sums in such species as were
of most value abroad. to answer this objection, I shall make a
supposition. A. B. merchant has occasion for a 1000 lib. in Holland,
and desires C. D. banker to give him a bill for that value; there is
no money due in Holland to Scots merchants, so C. D. must export the
money to pay the bill he draws: but, there being no bank, nor any
possibility of getting a 1000 lib. in 40 pence pieces, he sends out
money of different species. this does not hinder the money to go out,
but makes the exchange dearer by 2 or 3 per cent, than it would have
been if 40 pence pieces could have been got. and tho’ no other money
were left, but old marks, if a ballance is due, these will go out, tho’
not worth 10 pence: the exchange will be so much higher, the profit of
exporting is the same; and so far from doing hurt to the country, the
bank by furnishing such pieces as could be exported to least loss, kept
the exchange 2 or 3 per cent lower than otherwise it would have been,
and saved yearly the sending out a considerable sum to pay a greater
ballance, the higher exchange would have occasioned.




                               CHAP. IV.

 _The several measures now proposed, considered. as, raising or
 allaying the money. coyning the plate. regulating the ballance of
 trade. or, re-establishing the bank._


When I use the words, raising the money, I desire to be understood
raising it in the denomination; for I do not suppose it adds to the
value.

There is no way silver can be made more valuable, but by lessening
the quantity, or increasing the demand for it. if the export and
consumption of silver be greater than the import, or the demand be
increased; silver will be of more value. if the quantity imported be
greater than the quantity exported or consumed, or the demand lessened;
silver will be of less value.

If raising or allaying the money could add to its value, or have any
good effect on home or foreign trade; then no nation would want money.
a 100 lib. might be raised or allayed to 2, to 10, to a 100 times the
denomination it had, or more as there were occasion. but as ’tis unjust
to raise, or allay money; because, then all contracts are payed with
a lesser value than was contracted for; and as it has bad effects on
home or foreign trade: so no nation practises it, that has regard to
justice, or understands the nature of trade and money. if A. B. sell
12 chalder of victual for a 100 lib. payable in 6 months, with which
he is to pay bills of exchange of that value, to be drawn on him then
from France for wine he has commission’d; and in that time the money
is raised or allayed to double, the 100 lib. A. B. receives will only
pay half the bill he has to pay, being only equal to 50 lib. of the
money he contracted for. nor will that 100 lib. buy the same quantity
of goods of the country, that a 100 lib. bought before: it will pay
where money is due, and satisfie past contracts made upon the faith of
the publick, because the prince says every man shall take half what is
owing him in full payment. but in bargains to be made, the value of
the money will be considered; goods will rise, tho’ perhaps not to the
proportion the money is raised; and such persons as do not raise their
goods, equal to the money, are imposed on.

When 6 pence is raised to 12 pence, the 6 pence is worth 12 pence; but
the value of the pence is lowered to half-pence.

To explain this matter better, I shall suppose when money is raised,
goods rise, or not.

If goods rise, then raising the money has not the effect designed. if
a piece of serge is sold for 40 sh. and the shilling be raised to 18
pence, the piece of serge will be sold for 3 lib. this adds to the tale
of the money, and pays debts with two thirds of what is due, but does
not add to the money. this is the natural consequence of raising the
money; for, it is not the sound of the higher denomination, but the
value of the silver is considered.

If, when money is raised, goods keep the prices they had before: then
all goods exported are sold for a lesser value abroad, and all goods
imported are sold dearer. a half-crown is raised to 40 pence, and that
half-crown buys the same quantity of goods 40 pence bought before;
then the merchant who sends goods to Holland, to the value of 300 lib.
which are sold for 390 lib. there, would gain 220 lib. on the value of
300 lib. exported: because, 390 lib. in Holland, would be equal to, or
worth by exchange at the par, or sent in bullion, 520 lib. in Scotland.
that trade would bring no more profit to the nation, than when the
return of the goods yielded only 390 lib. for, 390 lib. before it was
raised, had the same quantity of silver, that 520 lib. rais’d money
would have; and bought as great a quantity of foreign goods. but that
trade would be so profitable to the merchant, that more people would
deal in it than could get goods to buy; and as more buyers than sellers
would raise the prices here, so one merchant under-selling the other
would lower the prices in Holland. but tho’ the prices kept low here,
and our merchants kept up the prices abroad: the Dutch knowing the
goods were so cheap in the country, would buy none from our merchants,
but commission them in return of goods they sent.

Suppose the yearly export first cost 300000 lib. sold abroad 390000
lib. the import, and expence abroad 410000 lib. and 20000 lib. sent in
money, to pay the ballance. the money raised one third, and goods to
keep the prices they had before, 225000 l. sent to Scotland in foreign
money, or goods, or by exchange, would buy what was sold abroad for
390000 lib. the export, import, and expence abroad continuing the same,
Scotland would be due a ballance of 185000 lib. for, tho’ Scots goods
were sold under the value, yet other nations would not sell their goods
for less than before; or than they could have in other places.

It may be alledged, we have more product and manufacture, than is
consumed, or exported; and selling cheaper, would occasion a greater
demand for our goods abroad.

The product and manufacture might be much increased, if we had money to
imploy the people: but, I’m of opinion we have not any great quantity
of goods, more than what is consumed or exported. allow selling cheaper
would occasion a greater demand; that the greater demand, would
occasion an increase in the product, and manufacture, to the value of
a 100000 lib. and allow that the extraordinary cheapness of goods, did
not occasion a greater consumption in the country: yet, we would be in
the same condition as before; 20000 l. would be still due of ballance,
and the improvement would be given to foreigners for nothing. but this
improvement is imaginary, for tho’ the demand increased, yet without
more money more people could not be imployed, so no further improvement
could be made: we would be forced to retrench near one half of the
ordinary consumption of foreign goods, and expence abroad; not having
money to pay the great ballance would be due.

Some think foreign money being raised, would bring in money to Scotland.

Tho’ the crown were rais’d to 10 s. yet if a ballance is due by
Scotland, the exchange will be above the par, and, ’tis not to be
supposed an English merchant will bring crowns to Scotland, when for a
100 payed in at London, he can have 105 or 6 of the same crowns payed
him at Edinburgh.

If the ballance of trade was equal, foreign money raised, and Scots
money not raised in proportion; foreign money would be brought in, and
a greater value of Scots money would be carried out. ’tis the same loss
to a country when money is raised, and goods do not rise in proportion:
if foreigners send in money to buy goods, and this money when exported
is not valued so high as here; the return in goods will be so much
less, besides the want of the profit we would have had on the export of
our goods.

If all import, and foreign expence were discharged, Scotland would then
be so much richer, as there was bullion or money imported: but, if that
prohibition be supposed, Scotland would be richer by keeping the money
at the value it has; because, a greater quantity would be brought in,
to buy the same quantity of goods.

If we could be supposed to be without any commerce with other nations,
a 100 lib. may be allayed and raised to have the same effect in trade
as a million: but, if a stranger were suffered to come to Scotland, he
might purchase a great part of the land or goods with a small sum. and
a rich man here would make a very small figure abroad.

Money is the measure by which all goods are valued; and unless goods
rise to the full proportion the money is raised, the goods are
undervalued. if the yearly value of Scotland in product and manufacture
be 2 millions, at 20 years purchase 40 millions. the money a 100000
lib. raising the money 20 per cent, makes it pass for a 120000 lib.
suppose the goods rise only 10 per cent, then that a 120000 l, is equal
in Scotland to a 110000 l. of the money before it was raised; and buys
the same quantity of goods. so, an addition is made of 20000 lib. to
the tale and of 10000 lib. to the value of Scots or foreign money,
compared with the value of Scots goods: but the measure by which goods
are valued, being raised in the denomination 20 per cent; and the goods
rising only 10 per cent: Scotland is near 4 million, or one tenth less
valuable than before. and any man who sells his estate, will receive a
tenth less silver, or of any other foreign goods for it, than if he had
sold it before the money was raised.

France and Holland are given as examples of raising and allaying the
money. in France the money is higher in the denomination than in other
countries, but that does not hinder the money of France to be exported.
when the lued’ore was at 12 livres, the ballance was against France,
exchange 10 per cent above the par: and a 110 lued’ores at 12 livres
were payed then at Paris, for a 100 lued’ores of the same weight and
fineness at Amsterdam, and passing there for 9 guilders bank money; so
10 per cent was got by exporting money from France. when the lued’ore
was raised to 14 livres, that did not make the ballance against France
less; the exchange continued the same, 110 lued’ores tho’ at 14 livres
were payed for a bill of a 100 at Amsterdam, and the same profit was
made by exporting money. if the exchange happened to be lower, it was
from the ballance of trade due by France being less, and that would
have lowered the exchange whether the money had been raised or not.
but the raising the money, so far from bringing the ballance to the
French side, keeps the ballance against France: for, as their goods do
not rise to the full proportion the money is raised, so French goods
are sold cheaper, and foreign goods are sold dearer, which makes the
ballance greater, occasions a greater export of money, sets idle so
many of the people as that money employed, lessens the product or
manufacture, the yearly value of the country, and the number of the
people.

’Tis thought the Dutch coin lued’ores, and send them to France, where
they pass at 14 livres. and, that guineas were sent from Holland to
England, in the time of the clipt money; because they past there for 30
s. but these people are misinformed. ever since I have known any thing
of exchange, a lued’ore at Amsterdam whether new or old, has been of
more value by exchange, than a new lued’ore at Paris. and in the time
of the clipt money, a guinea in Holland was worth more by exchange,
than a guinea in England. these who were ignorant of the exchange,
might buy up guineas or lued’ores, to carry to England or France,
but they would have got more by bill. there was a profit then upon
exporting guineas and lued’ores from England and France to Holland. the
pound English at that time was given for 8 guilders, or under; and the
exchange from Amsterdam to Paris has been these 8 or 10 years for the
most part, considerably above the par on the Dutch side. I have known
the pound English at 7 guilders 13 stivers, and the French crown of 3
livres bought in Holland for 37 stivers, in London for 39 pence half
penny.

Raising the money in France is laying a tax on the people, which is
sooner payed, and thought to be less felt than a tax laid on any other
way. when the King raises the lued’ore from 12 livres to 14, they are
taken in at the mint for 13 livres, and given out for 14; so the King
gains a livre on the lued’ore, and this tax comes to 20 or 25 million
of livres, sometimes more, according to the quantity of money in the
country. but so far from adding to the money, it stops the circulation:
a part being kept up till there is occasion to export it to Holland,
from whence a return is made by bill, of a sum of livres equal to the
same quantity of new lued’ores that were exported of old ones, and 8
or 10 per cent more, according as the exchange is on the Dutch side.
others who won’t venture to send the money out, keep it till the new
money is cryed down, so save a 13th part, which the King would have
got if they had carried the money to the mint to be recoined. this tax
falls heavy on the poorer sort of the people.

’Tis generally thought the Dutch money is not worth half what it passes
for. but it will prove otherwise when examined. the bank by which most
payments are made, receive and pay in bank money, which is better
than the English, ducatdowns are at 3 guilders, and other bank money
in proportion; and I’m informed the current money has silver in it
to the value or near, except some of their skellings which are worse
than others: the making them worse was not design’d, it was an abuse
occasioned by too many towns having power to coin: which abuse was
stopt so soon as known, and that species cryed down to 5 stivers and a
half.

Some propose the money may be raised, to give the little we have left
a better circulation, and to bring out hoarded money. the lowering it
by degrees to take place in 3 or 4 months, will have the same effect;
and other good consequences: for, from what has been said, page 54
and 55. there is reason to think, if the money were lowered to the
English standard, exchange would be on our side, and a ballance due us:
providing the export, the import, and expence abroad continued as now.

There is another argument for raising the money, which is, that some
goods don’t yield profit enough abroad, so are not exported. if serges
worth in Scotland a 100 lib. are worth 120 in Holland, the merchant
won’t export them for 20 per cent profit: but if the money is raised 20
per cent, and goods keep at the prices they had before, the same money
that bought 100 lib. of serges, buying now to the value of 120 lib. and
these goods being worth in Holland 144 lib: that addition to the profit
by raising the money, will occasion the export of them.

This is the same as if a merchant who had a 100 different sorts of
goods, and was offered 30 per cent profit upon 90 of them; but no body
offering above 20 per cent profit for the other 10 sorts, should add
a quarter to the measure by which he measured his goods, and sell all
the 100 sorts for the same price he sold them before: as this merchant
would find himself a considerable loser by this expedient, so will a
nation who raises their money.

For the same reason, it would be a great loss to Scotland if all goods
were allowed to be exported without duty; some ought to be free of
duty, and some not, according to their value abroad.

The true and safe way to encourage the export of such goods, as do
not yield great enough profit; is by a draw-back. if serges sent to
Holland give only 20 percent profit, 10 per cent given as a draw-back
will encourage their export: the draw-back given to the merchant is not
lost to the nation, and what is got by the manufacture or export of the
goods, is gained by the nation.

A draw-back is the best method yet known for encouraging trade, and it
may be made appear, that 10 or 15000 applyed that way, will occasion
an addition to the export to the value of a 100000 lib. nor is any
part of that 10 or 15000 lib. lost to the nation; for, if A. B. and C.
Scots-men get such draw-back, it is the same thing to the nation, as if
it had not been given. when draw-backs are paid out of funds for the
support of the government, little money is applyed that way; because,
so much is taken from the prince: but, if there was a national fund
for the encouragement of trade, that nation might improve trade, and
undersell other nations that did not follow the same measures. but this
is supposing there was money in the country to imploy the people.

Coining the plate were a loss of the fashion, which may be valued one
6th, and would add little to the money: the plate at the restauration
was inconsiderable, having been called in a little before. since there
may have been wrought one year with another about 60 stone weight; of
that a great part has been melted down, or exported, the remainder
won’t be of great value. what plate has been imported belongs to a few
men of quality, who will send it out of the country rather than lose
the fashion; and in that they do a service to the country, providing
they don’t spend it abroad, because wrought plate will sell for more
silver at London, than it will melt to here.

If ’tis proposed the money be allayed, and the advantage of the allay
be given to the owners of the plate. suppose the new money with allay
be raised to double the denomination; 5 sh. of plate with the fashion
worth 6 sh. will give at the mint 10 sh. allay’d money: but even then
the plate will not be brought in voluntarily, for that plate sold in
England, and the value brought back by bill, will yield from 11 to 12
sh. exchange being above the par, and 6 pence supposed to be got for
the fashion of the ounce of plate.

If it be necessary to coin the plate, such plate should be allowed to
be exported as can be sold abroad for more than its weight: security
being given to import money or bullion to the value.

Some propose a regulation of the ballance of trade, by retrenching the
consumption of foreign goods, and expence in England: so the ballance
being brought to be on our side, we may become rich by living within
our yearly value, as we became poor by spending beyond it.

Such a regulation will have its difficulties. 1. to discharge all
or a great part of the import, will lessen considerably the revenue
of the crown; and her majesty may not think good to give the royal
assent to such a regulation, unless an equivalent be given. 2. such
a regulation would not be so strictly kept, but a part of what was
used to be imported would be stole in. 3. the residence of our princes
being in England, we are under a necessity of having a ministry there:
imployments being at the disposal of the prince, and London being a
place of more diversion than Edinburgh, the gentry will continue to go
to London for places or pleasure.

But allowing the royal assent were given to such a regulation; either
with or without an equivalent; and the regulation could be so strictly
kept, that nothing were imported contrair to that law; and allow 20000
lib. could be saved of the expence in England, so that the import and
expence abroad should be 60000 lib. less than last year: yet there are
other difficulties, that I fear will make the regulation ineffectual.

1. Suppose the ballance last year due by us was 20000 lib. the import
and expence abroad lessened 60000 l. these who propose this regulation
may think a ballance will be due to us of 40000 lib. but as the bank
may have supplyed us with 60000 lib. of notes, more than the money in
bank: and as 20000 lib. is supposed to have been exported last year: so
our money being lessened 80000 lib. the next year’s export may be so
much less valuable, the want of that money having set idle a part of
the people were then imployed: and a greater ballance be due than last
year, notwithstanding of the regulation.

2. 40000 lib. first cost of goods imported, and 20000 lib. spent
abroad, lessened the consumption of the goods of the country; and the
export was by so much greater, as the consumption of the goods of
the country was lessened. but this regulation occasioning a greater
consumption of the goods of the country, the export will be less.

3. Several merchants may have exported goods, tho’ they had not much
profit upon the export of them; but because of the profit to be made
upon the import; which being lessen’d, may likewise lessen the export.

4. If Scotland discharge or put a very high duty on the goods of other
nations, other nations may discharge Scots goods.

Allowing there were no difficulties in regulating the ballance of
trade, and that the same measures were followed as are followed in
Holland; we would grow richer, but their riches would increase in the
same proportion: and 50 years hence Scotland would be as poor as now,
in comparison with Holland.

If two countries equal in their product, people, &c. the one with a
100000 lib. of money, and living within its yearly value; so that the
first year a ballance is due of 20000 l. the second year of 25000 lib.
and so on. the other country with 20 millions of money, and consuming
more than the yearly value; so that a million is sent out to pay the
ballance, the second year 1200000 lib. and so on. this country will be
soon poor, and the other be soon rich: but if that people who has 20
millions of money, will retrench in proportion to the other; they will
be rich and powerful in comparison with the other.

Considering how small a share we have of the money of Europe, and how
much trade depends on money: it will not be found very practicable to
better our condition, but by an addition to our money. or if it is
practicable without it, it is much more so with it.

The bank will add little to the money; for as credit is voluntary, it
depends on the quantity of money in the country. and tho’ the bank
had never failed, yet it could not have kept its credit much longer.
because, the quantity of money in Scotland is not sufficient to give
a circulation to such a sum of notes, as will pay the charges of the
bank, and the interest to the owners.

’Tis thought the proprietors of the bank design to apply to the
parliament for further priviledges: but as their design is not yet made
publick, I shall only say in general, that if other priviledges are
to be given, then it is not the same bank; at least not on the same
establishment it was: in either of these cases, every person should be
allowed to share in it.

When a bank is establish’d every person may have a share, upon the
terms of the act of parliament; and he that offers first is preferred.
suppose upon the setting up of the bank, A. B. and C. did not subscribe
to it, because they thought the establishment not favourable enough: so
long as they who did subscribe can support the bank upon the terms of
the act of parliament, none will pretend to any share in it; unless the
subscribers are pleased to sell. but if other priviledges are given,
A. B. and C. as any others of the country may desire the books to be
opened, that they be allowed to share in it; and any other set of men
who offer the same security, may at the same time be allowed to set
up a bank with the same priviledges: so every shire in Scotland will
desire one. and if new priviledges are given to this bank, it were a
hardship to refuse the same to others, who are able and willing to give
the same security, especially when the nation stands in need of more
money than this bank would be allowed to give out.




                               CHAP. V.

 _That any measures proposed for increasing the silver money or
 establishing a credit promising a payment of silver money are
 ineffectual. that silver money has fallen much from the value it had.
 that land is of greater value. that silver may lose the additional
 value it received from being used as money._


National power and wealth consists in numbers of people, and magazines
of home and foreign goods. these depend on trade, and trade depends on
money. so to be powerful and wealthy in proportion to other nations, we
should have money in proportion with them; for the best laws without
money cannot employ the people, improve the product, or advance
manufacture and trade.

The measures have been used to preserve and increase money, or such
as are now proposed, are attended with difficulties; and tho’ the
difficulties were removed, are ineffectual, and not capable to furnish
money so as to improve the country, or extend trade in any proportion
to the improvements and trade of other nations.

Credit that promises a payment of money, cannot well be extended
beyond a certain proportion it ought to have with the money. and we
have so little money, that any credit could be given upon it, would be
inconsiderable.

It remains to be considered, whether any other goods than silver, can
be made money with the same safety and convenience.

From what has been said about the nature of money, chap. 1. it is
evident, that any other goods which have the qualities necessary
in money, may be made money equal to their value, with safety and
convenience. there was nothing of humour or fancy in making silver to
be money; it was made money, because it was thought best qualified for
that use.

I shall endeavour to prove, that another money may be establisht, with
all the qualities necessary in money in a greater degree than silver;
with other qualities that silver has not: and preferable for that use,
tho’ silver were the product of Scotland. and that by this money, the
people may be employed, the country improved, manufacture advanced,
trade domestick and foreign be carried on, and wealth and power
attained.

What I propose, will I hope be found safe, and practicable;
advantageous in general to Scotland, and in particular to every
Scots-man.

But as I offer to prove, that what I shall propose is more qualified
for the use of money than silver: so before I come to the proposal, I
shall shew some defects in silver money; and that it has not, nor does
not answer the design of money.

Money is the measure by which goods are valued, the value by which
goods are exchanged, and in which contracts are made payable.

Money is not a pledge, as some call it. it’s a value payed, or
contracted to be payed, with which ’tis supposed the receiver may, as
his occasions require, buy an equal quantity of the same goods he has
sold, or other goods equal in value to them: and that money is the most
secure value, either to receive, to contract for, or to value goods by;
which is least liable to a change in its value.

Silver money is more uncertain in its value than other goods, so less
qualified for the use of money.

The power the magistrate has to alter the money in its denomination or
fineness, takes away the chief quality for which silver was made money.
in countries where the money is often changed in the denomination or
fineness, ’tis more uncertain to contract for money, than it was in the
state of barter to contract for goods. if a 100 ounces of silver are
lent, or contracted for, and a bond given for them denominat pounds,
payable in a year: in that time half a crown is raised to a crown, and
50 ounces pays the 100 lent, or contracted for.

Tho’ the magistrate did never alter the money in its denomination or
fineness, yet it is more uncertain in its value than other goods.

Goods of the same kind and quality differ in value, from any change in
their quantity, or in the demand for them: in either of these cases
goods are said to be dearer, or cheaper, being more or less valuable,
and equal to a greater or lesser quantity of other goods, or of money.

Silver in bullion or money changes its value, from any change in its
quantity, or in the demand for it: in either of these cases goods are
said to be dearer, or cheaper; but ’tis silver or money is dearer or
cheaper, being more or less valuable, and equal to a greater or lesser
quantity of goods.

Perishable goods as corns, &c. increase or decrease in quantity as the
demand for them increases or decreases; so their value continues equal
or near the same.

More durable goods as mettals, materials for shipping, &c. increase in
quantity beyond the demand for them, so are less valuable.

Silver or money increases in quantity by so much as is imported to
Europe, more than is consumed or exported. the demand has encreased,
but not in proportion to the quantity; for, 1st. the same quantity of
silver or money, won’t purchase the same quantity of goods as before.
2dly. 10 per cent was payed for the use of it; now ’tis to be had at 6,
in Holland at 3 or 4.

An ounce of silver being worth 5 sh. and 2 pence, and a crown worth 60
pence, unless altered by the prince, makes most people insensible of
any change in the value of silver or money: but as one year the boll of
barley is sold for 2 crowns, and the year after for 3; this difference
comes from a change in the quantity or demand of the barley, or of the
money: and that of the money will occasion a difference in the price,
as well as that of the barley.

If last year a 100 sheep were sold for a 100 crowns, and the person
sold them desires this year to buy the same number of sheep; tho’ the
quantity of the sheep, and the demand for them be the same as last
year: yet if the money is increased in quantity, and the demand for
it not increased in proportion, the 100 sheep will be equal in value
to more money than the year before, so the money is cheaper. if the
quantity of the money, and the demand for it be the same as before; yet
if the sheep are lesser in quantity, or the demand for them greater:
the 100 sheep will be equal to a greater quantity of money, so the
sheep are dearer.

So tho’ the magistrate did never alter the money, yet ’tis liable to
a change in its value as silver; from any change in its quantity, or
in the demand for it: and the receiver is doubly uncertain whether the
money he receives or contracts for, will, when he has occasion, buy
him the same goods he has sold, or other goods equal in value to them;
because of the difference may happen in the value of the money, or the
goods he is to buy.

And this uncertainty is, tho’ both money and goods were certain in
their quality.

The difference of the prices of most goods, from changes in their
quantity, or in the demand for them, would be much prevented, if
magazines were kept; but the difference in their prices from the
greater or lesser quantity of, or demand for money; cannot be prevented
so long as silver is the money.

That money is of much lesser value than it was; will appear by the
value goods, land, and money had 200 years ago.

By the acts of the council of Edinburgh, it appears, that anno 1495,
the fiars for wheat was 6 sh. and 8 pennies Scots money the boll.

Anno 1520, claret and white French wines were ordered to be sold in the
taverns at 6 pennies Scots the pint, and ale at 20 pennies Scots the
gallon.

Anno 1526, the milns belonging to the town were lett for 400 merks
Scots, now they give 13000.

The petty customs at Leith then lett for 115 merks.

Anno 1532, the load of malt containing 9 firlots, was ordered to be
sold at 32 sh. Scots the load.

Anno 1551, ordered that the best mutton bulk be sold for 12 pennies
Scots, the 2d. sort for 10 pennies, and the worst sort for 8 pennies.

Anno 1553, the 9 firlots of malt old measure, with the charity, is
ordered to be sold for 36 sh. Scots. the landwart bread to weigh 40
ounces, and the townbread 36 ounces the 4 penny or plack loaf.

Anno 1555, the bakers are ordered for each boll of wheat, to deliver 7
score loafs, at 16 ounces the loaf.

By an act of the 5th parliament of Queen Mary, anno 1551. ’tis
ordained, that wines imported upon the east and north coast, should
not be sold dearer than 20 lib. Scots the tun of Bourdeaux wine, and
16 lib. the tun of Rochel wine. the pint of Bourdeaux wine 10 pennies,
and the pint of Rochel wine 8 pennies. and that wine imported upon the
west coast, be sold no dearer than 16 lib. Scots the tun of Bourdeaux
wine, and 12 or 13 lib. the tun of Rochel wine. 8 pennies the pint of
Bourdeaux wine, and 6 pennies the pint of Rochel wine.

So that what 5 lib. bought 200 years ago, will not be bought now for
a 100 lib. nor were goods in greater plenty, or of less value than
now: on the contrair, as these acts were made to regulate the prices
of goods, ’tis reasonable to think they were in lesser quantity than
now, proportioned to the demand, so of more value. but money having
increased in quantity, more than in demand, and having been altered by
the prince; is fallen in value: and a 100 lib. now is not worth what 5
lib. was worth before.

Land may be computed to have been improved in 200 years, that what pays
now two bolls the acre, payed then but one boll: which may be known
from old rentals.

Money gave then 10 per cent interest, and as 384 acres, rented at a
boll the acre, victual at 8 sh. and 4 d. the chalder; so the property
of these acres was equal to, or worth a 100l. for a 100 lib. gave 10
lib. interest, and the 384 acres payed only such a quantity of victual,
as was sold for 10 lib. but as land (being preferable to money for many
reasons) is valued now at 20 years purchase, tho’ money is at 6 per
cent: so that land then may have been valued 14 years purchase or 140
lib.

As the quantity of money has increased since that time, much more than
the demand for it; and as the same quantity of silver has received a
higher denomination, so of consequence money is of lesser value: a
lesser interest is given for it: A greater quantity of it is given for
the same quantity of goods, and the land is worth more years purchase.

The value of such land now, the acre rented at 2 bolls, victual at
8 lib. 6 sh. and 6 pence, money at 6 per cent, so land at 20 years
purchase, would be 8000 lib. by this computation money is only worth
the 20th part of goods, and the 57th part of land, it was worth 200
years ago. part of this difference is from the improvement made on
land, and the greater demand for land, the quantity being the same,
whereby its value is greater: the rest of the difference is, from the
money being more encreased in quantity, than in demand, whereby its
value is lesser, and its use lower: as likewise from its being altered
in the denomination.

There was then a greater quantity of silver in the same number of pence
than there is now: which appears by several acts of parliament made
about that time.

Anno 1475, in the 8 par. of K. James the 3. the ounce of silver was
ordered to be sold for 12 sh. Scots, and 12 groats was made of the
ounce of silver.

The 3d. of November 1554, by an act of the town-council of Edinburgh,
the ounce of silver was ordered to be sold at 18 sh. and 8 pennies
Scots; but these acts do not mention the fineness the silver was of.
suppose the same number of pence had twice or 4 times the value of
silver in them that they have now: then silver is only fallen to one
tenth, or one fifth of the value it had to goods; and to one 28th, or
one 14 of the value it had to land. but still money is fallen to one
20th of the value it had to goods, and to one 57th of the value it had
to land.

The manner of lending money in France, and I suppose in other Roman
Catholick countries; is by way of perpetual interest, redeemable by the
debitor, and which the creditor may dispone or assign, but can never
demand the principal. and it is usury by law to take any interest for
money, if the creditor has power to call for the principal, tho’ the
term of payment be many years after the money is lent. suppose the
manner of lending in Scotland was the same 200 years ago, and that A.
B. having 768 acres of land, rented at a boll of victual the acre, the
yearly rent 48 chalder, at 5 lib. Scots the chalder, 20 lib. sterl. C.
D. worth a 100 lib. in money, to have lent it to A. B. and interest
being at 10 per cent, to have received an annual interest of 10 lib.
which he left to his son, and thought he had provided sufficiently
for him, 10 lib. being equal to, or worth 24 chalder of victual.
but interest being lowered to 6 per cent, money being raised in the
denomination, and of less value by its greater quantity: the 6 lib. now
paid for the annual interest of that 100 l. is not worth one chalder
of victual. and 384 acres, or the half of A. B’s land 200 years ago
only equal to a 100, or a 140 lib; is now worth 57 times that sum, the
rental supposed to be doubled, and its value at 20 years purchase.

In France it has been observed, that about 200 years ago, the same land
was in 30 years worth double the money it was worth before. so land
worth a 100 lib. anno 1500, was worth 200 lib. anno 1530. 400 lib. anno
1560. and so on, till within these 50 or 60 years it has continued near
the same value.

In England 20 times the quantity of money is given for goods, that was
given 200 years ago. in these countries ’tis thought goods have rose;
but goods have kept their value, ’tis money has fallen.

Most goods have increased in quantity, equal or near as the demand for
them has increased; and are at or near the value they had 200 years
ago. land is more valuable, by improvement producing to a greater
value, and the demand increasing, the quantity being the same. silver
and money are of lesser value, being more increased in quantity, than
in demand.

Goods will continue equal in quantity as they are now to the demand,
or won’t differ much: for the increase of most goods depends on
the demand. if the quantity of oats be greater than the demand for
consumption and magazines, what is over is a drug, so that product will
be lessened, and the land imployed to some other use: if by a scarcity
the quantity be lesser than the demand, that demand will be supplyed
from magazines of former years; or if the magazines are not sufficient
to answer the demand, that scarcity cannot well be supposed to last
above a year or two.

Land will continue to rise in value, being yet capable of improvement;
and as the demand increases, for the quantity will be the same.

Silver will continue to fall in value, as it increases in quantity, the
demand not increasing in proportion; for the increase does not depend
on the demand. most people won’t allow themselves to think that silver
is cheaper or less valuable, tho’ it appears plainly, by comparing what
quantity of goods such a weight of fine silver bought 200 years ago,
and what quantity of the same goods it will buy now. if a piece of wine
in France is equal in value to 20 bolls of oats there, that quantity
of oats can never be worth more or less wine; so long as the quality,
quantity and demand of both continues the same: but any disproportioned
change in their quality, quantity or demand, will make the same
quantity of the one, be equal to a greater quantity of the other. so
if a piece of wine in France, is equal to or worth 40 crowns there; it
will always continue so, unless some disproportioned change happen in
the quantity, quality, or demand of the wine, or of the money.

The reason is plain, why silver has encreased more in quantity than in
demand: the Spaniards bring as great quantities into Europe as they can
get wrought out of the mines, for it is still valued tho’ not so high.
and tho’ none of it come into Britain, yet it will be of less value in
Britain, as it is in greater quantity in Europe.

It may be objected that the demand for silver is now greater than the
quantity. it is answered: tho’ the demand is greater than the quantity;
yet it has not increased in proportion with the quantity. 200 years ago
money or silver was at 10 per cent, now from 6 to 3. if the demand had
increased as much as the quantity, money would give 10 p. cent as then,
and be equal to the same quantity of victual, or other goods that have
kept their value. if A. B. having a 1000 lib. to lend, should offer it
at 10 per. cent. interest, and desired land of 240 chalder of victual
rent for his security, as was used to be given 200 years ago: tho’ no
law regulate the interest of money, A. B. would find no borrowers on
these conditions; because silver having increased more in quantity than
in demand, and the denomination being altered, money is of less value,
and is to be had on easier terms. if the demand had encreased in the
same proportion with the quantity, and the money had not been raised,
the same interest would be given now as then, and the same quantity of
victual to pay the interest; for money keeping its value, 8 sh. and 4
pence would be equal to a chalder of victual, as it was then.

If 2000 lib. was laid out on plate 200 years ago, it is thought the
loss on the plate was only the fashion, and the interest; but if the
2000 lib. had been laid out on land, the rent of that land would be
more than the value of such plate.

Tho’ money or silver is so much fallen from the value it had, yet it’s
given as a value for one half, or two thirds more than its value as
silver, abstract from its use as money.

Suppose silver to be no more used as money in Europe, its quantity
would be the same, and the demand for it much lesser; which might lower
it 2 thirds or more; for besides that the demand would be less, its
uses as plate, &c. are not near so necessary, as that of money.

Goods given as a value, ought for their other uses to be valuable,
equal to what they are given for. silver was bartered as it was valued
for its uses as a metal, and was at first given as money, according to
the value it had in barter. silver has acquired an additional value
since, that additional use it was applyed to occasioning a greater
demand for it; which value people have not been sensible of, the
greater quantity making it fall more: but it has kept it from falling
so low it would have fallen, if it had not been used as money, and the
same quantity had come into Europe.

’Tis uncertain how long silver may keep that additional value: if
England set up a money of another kind, silver will not fall to one
third, because used in other places as money; but the lesser demand,
besides the ordinary fall from the greater quantity coming into Europe,
would occasion an extraordinary fall perhaps of 10 per cent: if the new
money then in England did not encrease beyond the demand for it, it
would keep its value, and be equal to so much more silver at home or
abroad than it was coined for; as silver would be of less value, from
the ordinary and extraordinary fall.

If England changed their money, other countries may do the same. if
Holland alone kept to silver money, the price of silver may be supposed
to fall immediately 50 per cent, from the lesser demand for it as
money. and a 100 lib. in Holland be worth no more than 50 lib. new
money in England, whether sent in specie or remitted by exchange; and
as more silver came into Europe, it would fall yet lower, because of
its greater quantity.

It may be objected, that in Scotland the quantity of goods are
proportioned to the demand as they have been some years ago; and money
scarcer, the demand for it the same or greater. so if goods and money
are higher or lower in value, from their greater or lesser quantity in
proportion to the demand for them; money should by its great scarcity
be more valuable, and equal to a greater quantity of goods. yet goods
differ little in price, from what they were when money was in greater
quantity.

To this it’s answered, the value of goods or money differs, as the
quantity of them or demand for them changes in Europe; not as they
change in any particular country. goods in Scotland are at or near the
same value with goods in England, being near the same in quantity in
proportion to the demand as there: money in Scotland is not above one
40th part of the money in England, proportioned to the people, land, or
product; nor above a 10th part proportioned to the demand. if Scotland
was incapable of any commerce with other countries, and in the state it
is now, money here would buy 10 times the quantity of goods it does in
England, or more: but as Scotland has commerce with other countries,
tho’ money were much scarcer than now, or in much greater quantity than
in England; if there were but 10000 lib. in Scotland, or a million, the
value of goods would not differ above 30 per cent, from what they were
abroad, because for that difference goods may be exported, or imported.
prohibitions may raise the difference higher.

Brittannia languens and others on trade and money, are of opinion that
goods in any country fall in value, as money in that particular country
grows scarcer. that, if there was no more than 500 lib. in England,
the yearly rent of England would not exceed 500 lib. and an ox would
be sold for a penny. which opinion is wrong, for as the ox might be
exported to Holland, it would give a price in England equal or near to
that it would give in Holland: if money were supposed to be equally
scarce in Holland, and other places as in England, the ox might give
no more than a penny, but that penny would have a value then equal to
5 lib. now; because it would purchase the same quantity of goods in
England or other places, that 5 lib. does now.

The same answer may be given to these who think an addition to the
money of any particular country would undervalue it so, that the same
quantity of goods would cost double the money as before.

If the money and credit current in England be 15 millions, Scotland
reckoned as 1 to 10, the money in Scotland encreased to a million and a
half, the demand in proportion to the demand in England; that addition
to the money of Scotland, would not make money of less value here, than
it is now in England. goods in Scotland would sell as they sell in
England, the product of the country would perhaps be 10 or 20 per cent
dearer, to bring it equal to what it sells in England; but all sorts
of manufacture would be cheaper, because in greater quantity: and all
goods imported would be cheaper, money being easier borrowed, merchants
would deal for a greater value, and men of estates would be capacitate
to trade, and able to sell at less profit. nor would land rise higher
than in England, the buyer having in his choice to buy elsewhere; the
better security of a register may be supposed to add a year’s purchase
or two to the value.

If the money of any particular country should encrease beyond the
proportion that country bears to Europe; it would undervalue money
there, or, according to the way of speaking, it would raise goods:
but as money would be undervalued every where the same, or near to
what it were there; it would be of great advantage to that country,
tho’ thereby money were less valuable: for that country would have the
whole benefit of the greater quantity, and only bear a share of the
lesser value, according to the proportion its money had to the money
of Europe. when the Spaniards bring money or bullion into Europe, they
lessen its value, but gain by bringing it; because they have the whole
benefit of the greater quantity, and only bear a share of the lesser
value.

What has been said, proves, 1st. that silver money is an uncertain
value; because lyable to be altered in the fineness or denomination by
the prince. A crown has no more silver in it than half a crown or 15
pence had a 150 or 200 years ago.

2dly. That as silver it has fallen from the value it had, the same
quantity not being worth the 5th or 10th part of what it was worth
then. A moneyed man then worth a 1000 lib. was richer at that time than
a landed man of 240 chalder of victual rent: but a man of such a money
estate, would not now be worth one 50th part of such a land estate.

3dly, That tho’ fallen so much, yet it is given as money or sold as
bullion, for much more than its value as a metal; to which it will be
reduced, so soon as another money is set up.

Considering the present state of Europe, France and Spain being masters
of the mines, the other nations seem to be under a necessity of setting
up another money. the only reason can be given why it has not yet been
done, is, that the nature of money has not been rightly understood: or
they would not have continued buying silver from Spain above its value
as a metal, when they had a more valuable money of their own; and every
way more fitted for that use.

The receiver of silver can have no great hopes that the value of it
will be greater; for ’tis not to be supposed it will be apply’d to any
other uses, than it is now apply’d to, whereby the demand for it may be
encreas’d: or that the quantity exported and consum’d, will be greater
than the quantity imported.

Tho’ it be scarce in any particular country, yet the money’d men will
have no great benefit by such scarcity, as has been shown: for unless
the scarcity is the same in all places with which that country trades,
money will not be valued much higher there than in other countries.

If it is alledged the mines in the West Indies may fail. ’tis the
interest of the Spaniards to give out that their mines begin to fail,
to keep up the price of silver; but if that were true, France ought
not to have engaged her self in a war, when by the partition treaty
she could have got any other parts of that monarchy that are valuable.
allowing the mines do fail, we ought the rather to provide ourselves
with another money.




                               CHAP. VI.

 _The proposal given in to Parliament by Dr. H. C. examined._


I did not intend to have said any thing about the Dr’s proposal, that
affair having been referr’d to a committee, who are to make their
report. but several people who are of opinion that the Dr’s proposal
is not practicable, being against what I am to propose, because they
think ’tis the same with his in some other dress: I thought it needful
to give a short account of the Dr’s proposal, and in what I differ from
him.

His proposal is to give out notes upon land, to be cancell’d by yearly
payments of about 2 and a quarter per cent, for 45 years. and that
these notes be current as silver money, to the value they are coin’d
for.

If notes given out after that manner, were equal in value to silver
money; then every landed man in Scotland, would desire a share of this
great and certain advantage: and I don’t see how it is practicable to
give every landed man a share.

Supposing it practicable, 45 years purchase in these notes, will not be
of so much value, as 20 years purchase of silver money.

No anticipation is equal to what already is. a years rent now is worth
15 years rent 50 years hence, because that money let out at interest,
by that time will produce so much. and tho’ the parliament would force
these notes, yet they would not have currency, any more than if the
government coin’d pieces of gold equal in weight and fineness, with a
guinea, and ordered them to pass for 5 lib.

These bills are propos’d to be repay’d and cancell’d in a term of
years, without paying any interest, but only so much as would defray
the charges of the office, which would not be above one half per cent.

There would then be many lenders, but few if any borrowers, except from
the land bank: for as ’tis the landed man borrows of the money’d man,
he would satisfie his creditor, and have bills to lend. the money’d
man would likewise have of these bills to lend, but there would be no
borrowers; or if any desired to borrow, they would have these bills
at a very low use. suppose at 2 per cent, then these bills would be
considerably less valuable than silver.

Any thing that is propos’d to have a currency as money, and is given
for a lesser interest than silver money, will be of less value.

It is not to be suppos’d any person will lend silver money at 2 per
cent, when they can have 6 per cent in England. so a 100 lib. silver
money, will yield as much as 300 lib. of these bills would: and 100
lib. in silver, will be equal to 300 lib. in bills. the 6 lib. the 100
lib. of silver yields, being silver, and the 6 lib. the 300 of bills
yields, being payed in these bills: and 1 lib. silver, being worth 3
lib. in bills; so the 6 lib. interest of the 100 lib. in silver, would
be equal to 18 lib. or the interest of 900 lib. in bills.

And tho’ they were given out to be repay’d in 20 years, at 5 per cent
for that time; or in 10 years, at 10 per cent: they would not be
equally valuable with silver. the difference would not be so great, as
when given out for 45 years.

The advantage the nation would have by the Dr’s proposal is; that tho’
these notes sell under the value of silver money, and 500 lib. in notes
were only equal to a 100 lib. in silver; yet the nation would have the
same advantage by that 500 lib. in notes, as if an addition of a 100
lib. had been made to the silver money.

So far as these bills fell under the value of the silver money, so far
would exchange with other countries be rais’d. and if goods did not
keep their price. (i. e.) if they did not sell for a greater quantity
of these bills, equal to the difference betwixt them and silver: goods
exported would be undervalued, and goods imported would be overvalued,
as has been explain’d page 43 and 44 about exchange.

The landed-man would have no advantage by this proposal, unless he
owed debt: for tho’ he received 50 lib. of these bills, for the same
quantity of victual he was in use to receive, 10 lib. silver money; yet
that 50 lib. would only be equal in value to 10 lib. of silver, and
purchase only the same quantity of home or foreign goods.

The landed-man who had his rent pay’d him in money, would be a great
loser. for by as much as these bills were under the value of silver, he
would receive so much less than before.

The landed-man who owed debt, would pay his debt with a less value than
was contracted for: but the creditor would lose what the debtor gain’d.

Dr. C. seems to be offended at my meddling in this affair, having, as
he says, borrow’d what I know of this subject from him. Two persons may
project the same thing, but so far as I can judge, what I am to propose
is different from his, and what I had form’d a scheme of several years
before I had seen any of his papers: which I can prove, if that were
necessary, by persons of worth I then show’d it to. I have not, to my
knowledge, borrowed any thing from Dr. C. land indeed is the value upon
which he founds his proposal, and ’tis upon land that I found mine:
if for that reason I have incroached upon his proposal, the bank of
Scotland may be said to have done the same: there were banks in Europe
long before the Dr’s proposal, and books have been writ on the subject
before and since. the foundation I go upon has been known so long as
money has been lent on land, and so long as an heretable bond has been
equal to a quantity of land. whether the structure he or I have built
upon that foundation be most safe, advantageous and practicable, the
parliament can best judge.

Dr. C’s proposal is by anticipation, to make land worth 50 or a 100
years purchase; and maintains that a 100 lib. to be payed yearly for
10, 50, or a 100 years, is a valuable pledge for a 1000, 5000, or a
10000l. of bills: and that these bills will be equal to silver-money.
if he can satisfie the nation that his proposal is practicable, he does
a very great service, and gives a certain advantage to the landed-man,
without wronging the money’d-man. I have shown the reasons why I think
the proposal is not practicable; and that notwithstanding any act of
parliament made to force these bills, they would fall much under the
value of silver. but allowing they were at first equal to silver, it is
next to impossible that two different species of money, shall continue
equal in value to one another.

Every thing receives a value from its use, and the value is rated,
according to its quality, quantity and demand. tho’ goods of different
kinds are equal in value now, yet they will change their value, from
any unequal change in their quality, quantity, or demand.

And as he leaves it to choice of the debtor, to pay in silver-money
or bills; he confines the value of the bills, to the value of the
silver-money, but cannot confine the value of the silver-money to
the value of the bills: so that these bills must fall in value as
silver-money falls, and may fall lower: silver may rise above the value
of these bills, but these bills cannot rise above the value of silver.

What I shall propose, is to make money of land equal to its value; and
that money to be equal in value to silver-money; and not lyable to fall
in value as silver-money falls.

Any goods that have the qualities necessary in money, may be made money
equal to their value. 5 ounces of gold is equal in value to 20 lib.
and may be made money to that value. an acre of land rented at 2 bolls
of victual, the victual at 8 lib. and land at 20 years purchase, is
equal to 20 lib. and may be made money equal to that value, for it has
all the qualities necessary in money. but that acre of land cannot be
coin’d to the value of 50 lib. no more than the 5 ounces of gold. and
tho’ the 5 ounces of gold, the 20l. silver-money and the acre of land,
be now equal in value; yet they cannot well continue so: for as I have
shown already, any disproportion’d change in the quality, quantity, or
in the demand of either of them, will make the same quantity of the
one, equal to a greater or lesser quantity of the others. land is what
in all appearance will keep its value best, it may rise in value, but
cannot well fall: gold or silver are lyable to many accidents, whereby
their value may lessen; but cannot well rise in value.




                              CHAP. VII.

 _The proposal with reasons for it._


To supply the nation with money, it is humbly propos’d, that 40
commissioners be appointed by parliament, answerable to parliament for
their administration, and the administration of the officers under
them: the nomination of these officers being left to the commissioners.

That the commissioners have power to coin notes: which notes to be
received in payments, where offer’d.

That a committee of parliament be appointed to inspect the management,
and that none of the commissioners be members.

That the commission and committee meet twice a year at Whitsunday and
Martinmass; their meetings, to begin 10 days before, and to continue 10
days after each term.

There are three ways humbly offer’d to the parliament, for giving out
these notes: they in their wisdom may determine which will be most safe.

1. To authorize the commission to lend notes on land security, the debt
not exceeding one half, or two thirds of the value: and at the ordinary
interest.

2. To give out the full price of land, as it is valued, 20 years
purchase more or less, according to what it would have given in
silver-money, the commission entring into possession of such lands, by
wadset granted to the commission or assigneys; and redeemable betwixt
and the expiring of a term of years.

3. To give the full price of land, upon sale made of such lands, and
disponed to the commission or assigneys irredeemably.

That any person shall have such bonds, wadsets, or estates assigned or
dispon’d to them, upon paying in the value to the commission.

That the commission don’t receive other money than these notes.

That no person who has contracted for these notes, shall be obliged to
receive silver or metal money.

That the commission have not power to coin more than 50000 lib. at
a time, and that no more be coin’d so long as there is 25000 lib.
remaining in the office.

That for a year and a half the commission be limited to a certain sum,
after that time to have power to coin what sums are demanded: unless
restricted by ensuing parliaments.

That these who desire to have money from the commission, give in a note
to the lawyers for the commission, a month before the term, of what
sums they want, with the rights of the lands they offer in pledge: and
that these who have notes to pay in to the commission, give warning 10
days before the term.

That the state of the commission, the sum of notes coin’d, the debt and
credit, with the highest number of the different notes, be publish’d
every term.

That any person who shall discover 2 notes of the same number, or of a
higher number than these publish’d, shall have a 100 lib. reward.

That the under-officers be intrusted with the sum of 20000 lib. to
change notes with; and that they attend the whole year.

That any member of parliament may inspect the state of the commission.

That no notes be coined, money lent, or rights assigned by the
commission, but at the terms of Whitsunday and Martinmass: and in
presence of at least 20 commissioners, and one third of the committee.

That the revenue of the commission, over what pays the charges, and
what part the parliament thinks needful to make good any losses
may happen to the commission, be applyed by way of drawback, for
encouraging the export, and manufacture of the nation.

That paper-money do not rise more than 10 per cent above silver-money;
so that he who contracts to pay in paper, may know what he is to pay in
case he cannot get paper-money.

The parliament may enter into a resolve, that the next sessions of this
or the next ensuing parliament, the state of the commission be taken
into consideration, preferable to all other business: and if found
hurtful to the country, the parliament may discharge any more notes to
be given out, and order what notes are then out to be called in.

That after 3 months from the date of the act, Scots and foreign money
be reduced to the English standard. the English crown to 60 pence, and
the other money in proportion to its value of silver. the 40 pence to
38 pence, the new mark to 13 pence 1/2, the old mark to its weight, the
ducatdowns to 68 pence, dollars to their weight. guineas not to pass 22
sh.

That after 4 months no Scots money, (except what shall be coined after
the act) nor any foreign money except the English money, be received in
any payments, or be sold as bullion but at the mint.

That for what old money or bullion is brought to the mint, the mint
return to the full value in new money of 12 pence, 6 pence, and 3
pence pieces; of eleven deniers fine, the 12 pence of 3 drops 3 grains
weight, the other pieces to weigh in proportion: the expence of coinage
to be payed out of the funds appropriated to that use.

That for 3 months, after the act, the new money pass for 13 pence, 6
pence half-penny, and 3 pence 1/4.

That after 3 months, bullion and wrought plate be of eleven deniers
fine, and 5 sh. and 2 d. the ounce of silver, gold not to pass 4 lib.

The paper-money proposed will be equal in value to silver, for it will
have a value of land pledg’d equal to the same sum of silver-money
that it is given out for. if any losses should happen, one 4th of
the revenue of the commission, will in all appearance be more than
sufficient to make them good.

This paper-money will not fall in value as silver-money has fallen, or
may fall: goods or money fall in value, if the increase in quantity,
or if the demand lessens. but the commission giving out what sums are
demanded, and taking back what sums are offered to be returned; this
paper-money will be keep its value, and there will always be as much
money as there is occasion, or imployment for, and no more.

If a contract for paper-money could be satisfied by paying the same
quantity of silver money, then that paper-money could not rise above
the value of silver, and would fall with it. but as the paper money is
a different species from silver, so it will not be lyable to any of the
changes silver money is lyable to.

Tho’ the parliament could give silver money to the people, in as great
quantity as there were occasion: the parliament could not justly know
what sum would serve the country, for the demand changes. if the
quantity of money is less than the demand, the landed man is wronged:
for a 100 lib. then being more valuable, will buy a greater quantity
of the landed mans goods. if the quantity of money is greater than
the demand, the money’d-man is wronged, for a 100 lib. then is not so
valuable, so will not buy the same quantity of goods a 100 lib. bought
before.

If the commission do not give out money when it is demanded, where good
security is offer’d; ’tis a hardship on the person who is refused, and
a loss to the country: for few if any borrow money to keep by them; and
if employ’d it brings a profit to the nation, tho’ the employer loses.

If the commission did not take back what sums were offer’d to be
return’d, it were a hardship on the money’d man, who has a sum payed
him, and does not know how to employ it; and the quantity being greater
than the demand for it, would fall in value.

After the method propos’d, the quantity being always equal to the
demand for it, it will keep its value, and buy the same quantity of
goods 50 years hence, as now: unless the goods alter in their value,
from any change in their quantity, or in the demand for them.

Suppose this commission had been establisht 200 years ago, land then at
14 years purchase, money at 10 per cent, victual at 8 shil. and 4 pence
the chalder, and paper money to have been given out upon land; 8 shil.
and 4 pence of that paper money, would now have been equal to a chalder
of victual, and to 8 lib. 6 sh. and 4 pence silver-money: because
silver-money having increas’d in quantity, more than the demand; and
having been alter’d in the denomination, has fallen to one 20th of the
value it had then. nor would the landed-man have receiv’d less for his
victual, than now; for that paper-money would have bought him 20 times
the quantity of goods, silver-money will buy.

Land has a more certain value than other goods, for it does not
encrease in quantity, all other goods may. the uses of goods may be
discharged, or by custom be taken from them, and given to other goods:
the use of bread may be taken from oats, and wholly given to wheat:
the use of money may be taken from silver, and given to land: the use
of plate, and the other uses of silver as a metal, may be taken from
silver, and given to some other metal, or some mixture that may be more
fitted for these uses. in any of these cases, these goods lose a part
of their value, proportion’d to the uses are taken from them: but land
cannot lose any of its uses. for as every thing is produced by land,
so the land must keep its value, because it can be turn’d to produce
the goods that are in use. if wheat is more us’d, and oats less, as the
land can produce both, it will be turn’d to produce what is most used,
because most valuable.

This money will not receive any additional value from being used as
money, so the receiver will be certain he can be no loser, tho’ after a
term of years the use of money is taken from it. the land will receive
an additional value, from being used as the pledge upon which the money
is issued; and that additional value would be greater than what silver
received: because, tho’ land be used as the pledge to issue out money
upon, yet none of its other uses would be taken from it: silver cannot
be us’d as money and plate at the same time. but as land is in greater
quantity than there will be occasion for to give out money upon; so
the additional value it receives, will not be near so great as that
silver-money has receiv’d.

Suppose the additional value land received were one 4th, land now at 20
years purchase, would then be at 25 years purchase. if the parliament
call’d in the paper money, he who had paper money could be no loser by
it, tho’ the land lost the additional value; for no more of it is given
out than the value of the land abstract from its use as money. whereas
if silver was no more used as money, he who had silver, would lose a
half, or 2 thirds; silver falling then to its value as a metal.

So that this paper money propos’d, having a better value than silver;
and receiving no addition to its value, from being used as money; and
not being lyable to any change in its value, the quantity and demand
encreasing and decreasing together: it is so far more qualified to be
the measure by which goods are valued, the value by which goods are
exchanged, and in which contracts are made payable.

The other qualities necessary in money, are,

1. Easy of delivery.

2. Of the same value in one place to what it is in another.

3. To be kept without loss or expence.

4. To be divided without loss.

5. To be capable of a stamp.

Paper money has these qualities in a greater degree than silver.

1. It is easier of delivery: 500 lib. in paper may be payed in less
time, than 5 lib. in silver.

2. It is nearer the value in one place to what it is in another, being
of easier carriage.

3. It can be easier kept; taking up less room. and without loss;
because it may be exchanged at the office. the consumption of paper is
not of so much value as the consumption of silver: the consumption of
the paper is a loss to the office, the consumption of silver is a loss
to the owner.

4. It can be divided without loss: because it may be changed for lesser
notes at the office.

5. It is capable of a stamp, and less liable to be counterfeit.

The practice of most trading nations confirms, that paper is more
qualified for the use of money, than silver; providing it hath a value.
in Holland silver is pledg’d, and paper is used as money. that land
pledg’d is a better value than silver pledg’d, is evident from what has
been said. in England, before the bank was set up, gold-smiths notes
were received in payments preferable to gold or silver: which shows
that paper money had all the qualities necessary in money, so much more
than gold or silver, as to equal the danger of a gold-smith’s breaking,
of which there were many examples. Mr. Lock, pag. 7th on interest of
money, says, that one gold-smith’s credit (being usually a note under
one of his servants hands) went for above eleven hundred thousand
pounds at a time.

The notes of the bank in Scotland went, tho’ there was no money in the
bank, and tho’ their acceptance was voluntary. the security for the
paper propos’d will be as good, the administration may be more safe
and satisfactory than that bank, or any other private bank; because it
is more public, and the commission has not any share of the profits.
besides it will not be liable to the hazard banks are liable to, from
the sale of shares.

And it seems strange that the administration of such a commission
should be doubted, when the parliament has the nomination of the
managers; when the managers are to be accountable to the parliament;
when the trust is to be so small, for more notes cannot be coin’d so
long as 25000 lib. is in the office; a committee of parliament is to be
appointed to inspect the management, the books are to be open to the
inspection of any member of parliament, and the state of the commission
is to be published in print.

Since the notes of the bank went upon a voluntary acceptance, tho’
there was no money in bank; ’tis reasonable to think the paper money
propos’d will at least have the same currency: being current by law
does not make it less valuable. he who took bank notes, could not be
sure the bank would be in a condition to give money for them; and
the person he was to pay money to, might refuse them: so he was more
uncertain, than if they had been current by law.

The silver money being to fall betwixt 8 and 9 per cent in 3 months,
it is not to be suppos’d that silver will be prefer’d to paper money;
since the notes of the bank, which is paper upon the same fund, went
at the ordinary interest: and tho’ the receiver was not certain of the
money at the time it was promised, or that the person he was owing to
would receive it.

It may be objected, that paper went because silver could be got for it
when demanded, or at a certain time.

That was very reasonable, but would not be so in this case: the
security pledg’d for that paper money, was silver. the security pledg’d
for this paper money, is land. this money has no relation to gold or
silver, more than to other goods. and it were more extravagant to say,
I won’t take a 100 lib. of such paper money for the goods I sell,
because I am not sure if 6 months hence it will buy me such a quantity
of silver; for silver may grow dearer: as it would be to say now, I
won’t take a 100 lib. in silver for the goods I sell; because I am not
sure if 6 months hence, it will buy me such a quantity of wine, for
wine may grow dearer.

4 Crowns won’t buy a guinea, tho’ they were coin’d for the same value;
nor won’t buy the 10th part of goods 4 crowns bought 200 years ago,
yet silver is received as a value, and contracted for, tho’ its value
lessens every year, and tho’ ’tis not perhaps worth above a third of
what ’tis given or contracted for, abstracted from the use of money.
this paper propos’d will not only keep its value; the encrease of the
quantity depending on the demand, and the quantity decreasing as the
demand decreases: but likewise the land pledg’d is as valuable as the
paper given out, abstract from its use as money, and encreases in value.

The objection may be made against silver money, and with good reason;
for it falls faster in its value than other goods, and may soon be
reduced to its value as a metal.

The paper money propos’d is equal to its self; but to continue equal
to such a quantity of any other goods, is to have a quality that no
goods can have: for that depends on the changes in these other goods.
it has a better and more certain value than silver money, and all the
other qualities necessary in money in a much greater degree, with other
qualities that silver has not, and is more capable of being made money
than any thing yet known. land is what is most valuable, and what
encreases in value more than other goods; so the paper money issued
from it, will in all appearance not only keep equal to other goods, but
rise above them.

Because of the extraordinary scarcity of silver in Scotland, and the
inclination people have to it, from its having been long used as money;
it may be necessary to restrict its price to 5 sh. and 2 pence the
ounce: but it will soon fall from that value of paper, if it come in
greater quantity into Europe, than is exported or consum’d.

Suppose an island belonging to one man, the number of tenents a 100,
each tenent 10 in family, in all a 1000; by these the island is
labour’d, part to the product of corns, the rest for pasturage: besides
the tenents and their families, there are 300 poor or idle, who live
by charity. there is no money, but rents are paid in kind, and if one
tenent has more of one product, and less of another than his family has
occasion for, he barters with his neighbour.

The people of this island know nothing of manufacture; the island being
plentiful, furnishes enough for their consumption, and an overplus
which they exchange on the continent for cloaths, and what other goods
they want: but as that overplus is only sufficient to make a return
of such a quantity of goods as they consume yearly, so they have no
magazines of their own or foreign goods to serve them in bad years, nor
no magazines of arms, ammunition, &c. for their defence.

’Tis propos’d to the proprietor, that if a money were establish’d
to pay the wages of labour, the 300 poor might be imployed in
manufacturing such goods as before were exported in product; and as
the 1000 that labour the ground were idle one half of their time, they
might be imployed so as their additional labour would be equal to that
of 500 more, which would lessen their import by providing them with a
part of such goods as before they brought from the continent, and raise
their export to 3 or 4 times the value it had: the return of which
would furnish them with greater quantities of foreign goods than they
wanted for consumption, which might be laid up in magazines.

The money propos’d is after this manner. the proprietor to coin pieces
of paper figured number 1, number 2, and so on; number 4 to be equal
to a certain measure of corn. the poor and other labourers would be
satisfied to take number 4 for the wages of a day’s labour, providing
it be so contriv’d that number 4 purchase them the measure of corn;
for as that corn can be barter’d with other goods, so number 4 would
purchase an equal value of any other goods.

To make number 4 equal to that measure of corn, the proprietor calls
his tenents together; tells them for the future, he will have his rent
payed in paper, so renews their leases, and where a 100 measures of
corn was payed, they oblige themselves to pay him number 400. the other
kinds the proprietor was payed in are valued, according to the value
they had in barter with corn; and leases made for paper.

The proprietor coins paper to the value of a year’s rent, imploys
such as are willing to work, and gives them paper-money as the price
of their labour. the tenent gives corn or any other goods he has to
the labourers for paper-money, and the proprietor receives it for his
rent. but as the consumption of the labouring man may be suppos’d to
be only equal to number 2; so the tenents cannot get the whole sum
issued by the proprietor, and consequently not enough to pay their
rent. if this were not remedied, the labouring men being masters of
the remaining part of the paper, and having no occasion for more goods
from the tenents, might raise the value of the paper. to prevent this,
the proprietor coins a greater quantity, which brings a part of the
poor and idle of the continent to the island, and occasions a greater
consumption, whereby the tenents are able to pay their rent in paper
as contracted for. the addition to the people is an advantage to the
island; for it adds to the power of the island, and their labour is
worth double what they consume.

This money tho’ it has no value but what the proprietor gives it, by
receiving it in payments of his rent; yet it will be esteem’d equal to
the product payed before.

If the proprietor would give it a value in land, computing after this
manner: an acre of land pays number 100, at 20 years purchase worth
number 2000. and dispone the property of land for paper at that value;
who would not be satisfied to receive or contract for that money,
since it not only bought the product, but the property of land at a
reasonable price?

Money is not the value for which goods are exchanged, but the value by
which they are exchanged: the use of money is to buy goods, and silver
while money is of no other use.

Tho’ silver were our product, yet it is not so proper to be made money
as land. land is what produces every thing, silver is only the product.
land does not increase or decrease in quantity, silver or any other
product may. so land is more certain in its value than silver, or any
other goods.

Land is capable of improvement, and the demand for it may be greater;
so it may be more valuable. silver cannot be suppos’d to be apply’d
to any other uses, than it is now apply’d to; or that the demand will
encrease more than the quantity.

Land cannot lose any of its uses, so will not be less valuable; silver
may lose the use of money it is now apply’d to, so be reduc’d to its
value as a metal.

It may likewise lose a part of its uses as a metal, these uses being
supply’d by other goods: so loses a part of its value as a metal. but
nothing can supply the uses of land.

Land may be convey’d by paper, and thereby has the other qualities
necessary in money, in a greater degree than silver.

Land has other qualities fitting it for the use of money, that silver
has not.

Land apply’d to the use of money, does not lose any of the other uses
it is apply’d to: silver cannot serve the use of money, and any of its
other uses as a metal.

Trade and money depend mutually on one another; when trade decays,
money lessens; and when money lessens, trade decays. power and wealth
consists in numbers of people, and magazines of home and foreign goods;
these depend on trade, and trade on money. so while trade and money
may be effected directly and consequentially; that which is hurtful to
either, must be so to both, power and wealth will be precarious.

If a money is establish’d that has no intrinsick value, and its
extrinsick value to be such, as it will not be exported; nor will not
be less than the demand for it within the country: wealth and power
will be attained, and be less precarious. money not being liable to be
lessen’d directly, nor consequentially; and trade not liable to decay
consequentially. so the power and wealth of that country will only be
precarious, from what may be directly hurtful to trade.

The paper money propos’d being always equal in quantity to the demand,
the people will be employ’d, the country improv’d, manufacture
advanc’d, trade domestick and foreign will be carried on, and wealth
and power attained. and not being liable to be exported, the people
will not be set idle, &c. and wealth and power will be less precarious.

From whence it is evident, that land is more qualified for the use of
money than silver; and preferable for that use tho’ silver were the
product of Scotland: being more certain in its value, and having the
qualities necessary in money, in a greater degree: with other qualities
that silver has not; so more capable of being the general measure by
which goods are valued, the value by which goods are exchanged, and in
which contracts are taken.

If 2000 lib. of paper money, is equal to the property of land worth
2000 lib. in silver; then that 2000 lib. of paper money, is equal to
2000 lib. of silver.

What buys land, will buy every thing the land produces; and what buys
the product of land, will buy all other goods whether home or foreign.
if wine is brought from France, the merchant designs to lay out his
money on goods, at interest, or on land: the commission does not
receive silver money, so he cannot have a bond from the commission,
unless he give the value in paper; and many of the landed men won’t
take silver for their goods or lands, having occasion for paper to pay
the commission. so the merchant will choose to sell his wines for paper
money, because it will purchase him goods, bonds or lands where silver
money will, being equally valuable: and in cases where silver money
will not.

And this is supposing silver were equally qualified for the use of
money, as land is. but as silver is an uncertain value, and is given
for much more than its value as a metal; and has not all the qualities
necessary in money, nor in so great a degree as paper money: so paper
money will for these other reasons be prefer’d to silver.

Some object that a paper money tho’ upon a good fund, and current in
the country; yet will not be valued abroad, equal to what it were in
Scotland.

The goods of Scotland will always be valued abroad, equal to goods of
the same kind and goodness; and that money tho’ of paper, which buys
goods in Scotland, will buy goods or money in other places. if a 1000
lib. in serges, linen cloth, &c. be worth abroad all charges payed 1300
lib. the merchant who exports such goods, will give a bill for that
money at the par, having 1300 lib. for what cost him a 1000.

When a nation establishes a money, if the money they set up, have a
value equal to what it is made money for, and all the other qualities
necessary in money; they ought to have no regard what value it will
have in other countries. on the contrair, as every country endeavours
by laws to preserve their money, if that people can contrive a money
that will not be valued abroad; they will do what other countries have
by laws endeavour’d in vain.

No nation keeps to silver because it is used in other countries, it is
because they can find nothing so safe and convenient. trade betwixt
nations is carried on by exchange of goods, and if one merchant sends
out goods of a less value, than he brings home; he has money furnish’d
him abroad by another who brings home for a less value than he sent
out: if there is no money due abroad, then the merchant who designed
to import for a greater value than he exported, is restricted; and can
only import equal to his export, which is all the many laws to regulate
trade have been endeavouring.

It is objected that we are under a necessity of having goods from
countries who will take none of ours. France does not allow money to
be exported, nor any ship to import goods, unless French goods are
exported from the same port, to the value of the goods which were
imported. by our law we are forbid to export money. but as I don’t
think the example of nations a good answer, I shall endeavour to give
a better. suppose our money is not valued abroad, and we have occasion
for goods from Denmark, who takes none of ours. these goods being
necessary here, will be valued higher than other goods that are not so
necessary; and the value of Scots goods sold in other countries, will
be carried to Denmark, in such goods as will sell there, or in foreign
money, and these necessary goods be brought home: because the trader
makes a greater profit by them, than by such goods as could have been
imported from that country, where the goods exported were sold.

But as this addition to the money will employ the people who are now
idle, and these now employ’d to more advantage: so the product will be
encreas’d, and manufacture advanc’d. if the consumption of the nation
continues as now, the export will be greater, and a ballance due to us:
and as the exchange depends on the ballance, so paper money here, will
be equal to a greater quantity of silver money abroad.

Suppose the yearly value of Scotland a million and a half, the yearly
value of England 40 millions; the value of Scotland, is only about one
28th part of the value of England. yet the quantity and quality of the
lands, and the numbers of people consider’d; Scotland will be at least
as 1 to 6. and if there was money to employ the people, we would be
as one to 6; for we have advantages peculiar to us, that do more than
equal the Plantation and East-India trades.

England is not improv’d so far as it might be, by a greater quantity of
money. we may have money equal to the demand, by applying our land to
that use. so our country may be improv’d above the proportion of one to
6. but if the propos’d addition to our money, improved the country only
so as to bear a proportion with England of one to 13, our yearly value
would be 3 millions: and our consumption not being half what the same
number of people consume in England; if the consumption continued as
now, the ballance due to Scotland would be greater, than the ballance
due to England.

This addition to our yearly value may be thought by some people, a
supposition that’s extravagant, but I desire these people will consider
what consequences the plenty of money has had in other places. as the
money of England has increas’d, the yearly value has increas’d; and as
the money has decreas’d, the yearly value has decreas’d.

I don’t doubt but the paper-money propos’d being given out equal to
the demand, would bring the yearly value of Scotland to 3 millions,
tho’ the fishing and other branches of foreign trade (which might be
improv’d to great advantage) were neglected. but suppose the yearly
value increas’d only half a million, of which a 4th spent in a greater
consumption of the product and manufacture of the country, a 4th in the
greater consumption of foreign goods and expence abroad, a 4th laid up
in magazines of foreign goods, a 4th would still be due of ballance and
brought home in silver.

If the consumption and expence increas’d equal to, or beyond the
improvement; as the paper-money could not be exported, so the people
would not be set idle, nor the manufacture decay: that money being like
an estate intail’d. we might continue to consume equal to the yearly
value, but could not lessen the yearly value, nor be poorer if we would.

If a greater value of goods was imported than was exported, and credit
given for the ballance; foreigners to pay themselves, would send a
lesser value of goods the year after. but such restrictions may be put
on the consumption of our own and foreign goods, as may make a ballance
due.

The revenue of the commission will be a great help toward the
advancing our trade in its infancy: what encourages the export of
goods, encourages the manufacture of them; and that money given as a
draw-back, will not only encourage the export and manufacture; but
likewise regain the reputation our goods have lost, and give them a
better reputation than the goods of other nations.

The draw-back ought not to be given to all goods, but to such as do not
yield a reasonable profit abroad, and upon condition they are found
sufficient.

The seal of the office of draw-back ought to be apply’d to these goods
that receive the draw-back; and these intrusted with the draw-back,
should give security to pay the price of such goods, with all charges,
if found insufficient.

When manufacture and trade prospers, the landed man’s rent is well
payed, and increases: when they decay, his rent is ill pay’d, and
decreases. a draw-back is so effectual a way to encourage and promote
manufacture and trade; that it were the landed men’s interest to tax
themselves, rather than a draw-back should not be given, where it is
necessary.

A draw-back is more necessary here than in other countries, for we do
not manufacture so well as other nations: we are not able to sell for
the same profit, our stocks being much smaller; and the goods of other
nations will be preferr’d to ours, because our goods are suspected.

Some object that this proposal is new, and has not been practis’d in
any nation.

The example of another nation ought not to determine us, to follow the
same measures, without examining whether that nation was the better or
the worse by such measures; and whether our circumstances and theirs
don’t differ so, as to make that hurtful or ineffectual to us, which
was of advantage to them. on the other hand, it is no argument against
any thing propos’d for the general good, to say it is new, and what has
not been practis’d.

When any thing propos’d has been already practis’d by other nations,
’tis a presumption in favours of such a proposal; and it’s a
presumption against it, if it has been refused: but a wise nation ought
not to be determined by example, to follow or refuse without examining.

This proposal has not been refus’d. the essential part is now practis’d
in France, for paper is current by law: and tho’ after a manner that
in all appearance ought to have hindred its currency, yet I’m inform’d
foreign bills are bought with paper money, the same as with silver or
gold.

The example of nations in relation to money would be a very uncertain
rule. for as has been said page 70, opposite measures have been us’d in
some countries to what have been used in others, and contrary measures
have been used in the same countries to what was used immediately
before, not because of any difference in their circumstances, but from
the opinion, that since the method used had not the effect design’d, a
contrary would; and there are good reasons to think that the nature of
money is not yet rightly understood.

Any other objections that I have yet heard against this proposal, are
such as may be fully answered, and so far as I can see into it, with
all the application I have been capable of, I cannot find any objection
but what may be fully answer’d; nor any difficulty in the execution,
but what may be removed: if there is any fallacy in the positions I lay
down, or any wrong consequences drawn from these positions, I have not
been able to discover them.




                              CHAP. VIII.

_The low condition this country is reduced to, notwithstanding its
natural advantages._


The natural advantages the Dutch have for trade, are, their situation
at the mouths of the rivers of Germany, and being near the bulky trade.

Their natural disadvantages are, smallness of territory, barrenness of
soil, producing little but what’s forc’d; want of mines; long winters;
unwholsome air; marishy, so oblig’d to great expence for foundation
to their buildings, in making and keeping up the high-ways, and in
draining the country yearly; a dangerous coast; difficult entry to
their rivers; the sea to defend against on one side, and powerful
neighbours on the other; and heavy taxes, the consequence of these
other disadvantages.

Yet they have so improv’d their few advantages, that they are become
a rich and powerful people. what has contributed to their riches and
power, was the early protection and favour the government gave to
trade; the liberty which was given to people of different religions;
the freedom of trade allowed to strangers; the example of their rulers
in oeconomy; but chiefly the neglect of trade in other countries,
particularly in Spain, who forced the people and trade of Flanders to
Holland.

Scotland has by nature many advantages for trade; a large territory;
of easie defence; plenty of people; a wholsome air; mines; a proper
situation for the eastern and western trades; near the bulky trade; a
safe coast; rivers of easie entry; the seas and rivers stockt with fish.

But numbers of people, the greatest riches of other nations, are
a burden to us; the land is not improv’d, the product is not
manufactur’d; the fishing and other advantages for foreign trade are
neglected: and the reason generally given is, that laziness and want of
honesty are natural to us.

If want of honesty and laziness were natural, they would be so to
mankind; or if peculiar to a people, this would be so to the Dutch
rather than to us: the air of Holland is grosser which inclines to
laziness; and the country not producing wherewith to maintain the
inhabitants, would force them to rob or cheat their neighbours, or
one another. but it is more reasonable to think laziness and want
of honesty are vices, the consequences of poverty; and poverty the
consequence of a faulty administration. if the same measures had been
taken in Scotland for encouraging trade, as was taken in Holland, we
had been a more powerful and richer nation than Holland. if Spain,
France and Britain, or any one of them had apply’d to trade, as early,
and upon the same measures Holland did; Holland would not have been
inhabited. but by their early application, and the wrong measures of
other countries, they have got such great magazines of what’s necessary
for their maintenance and defence; of rich commodities to sell to other
nations, of materials for shipping, &c. and such a quantity of silver,
esteem’d above its value as a metal by being used as money: that in
all appearance so long as silver is used as money, the great quantity
they have of it, with their great oeconomy, enabling them to under-sell
other nations; they will maintain the rank they hold in trade, and
consequently in power; notwithstanding their natural disadvantages, the
present application, and natural advantages of other nations.

This country is more capable of an extended trade than any other
country of Europe, yet it is reduc’d to a very low state. trade is
ruin’d; the national stock is wasted; the people forsake the country;
the rents of land are unpay’d; houses in towns, and farms in the
country are thrown upon the owners hands; the creditor cannot have the
interest of his money to live upon; and the debitor’s person and estate
are expos’d to the law.

The landed man, by having engaged his person and estate for the payment
of a species, which is not in his power to perform; and having no
alternative: by the law his person is at the mercy of the creditor, and
his estate to be sold for so much of that species as it will yield. if
2 or 3 money’d men call in their money, with a design to force their
debitors to part with their estates, at what prices they please to
impose: they may bring the price of land to 15 or 10 years purchase.
for they would not take bonds in payment, and few or none would be in a
condition to buy with money.

If victual should prove scarce, as we have not goods or money for any
value to send out for corns; so only a part of the people could be
maintained: the better part would have bread, but the more necessary
part, the labouring men, would be forc’d to leave the country, or
to starve in it. nor would they fare better in England; for as the
scarcity of money has set idle many of the people of England, so there
are more already than there is employment for: and our people, at least
many of them, would meet the same fate they had endeavoured to evite.

The landed men would want people to labour the ground; they would
perhaps get food and cloathing for themselves and families, but these
they were owing to, in all appearance, would get nothing: for the case
being general, and the landed men the stronger party; they would not
suffer their liberty and estates to be taken from them. but tho’ the
law could be put in execution, and the estates of the landed men were
put to sale; as there would be few purchasers, the price of land would
fall very low. suppose the land were sold or given among the creditors
for 15 years purchase, or less; it would be sold for more than it were
worth, for they would not find people to labour it: so many would be
sufferers, and none gainers.

If neither of these cases happen; yet this country cannot well subsist
in the condition ’tis in: if this opportunity is neglected, if wrong
or ineffectual measures are taken, in all appearance we will be in
confusion before we have another opportunity.

To raise or allay the money, to coin the plate, or regulate trade, are
offer’d as measures to supply the want of money: and ’tis thought any
one of them will bring us out of our difficulties. when they come to
be examin’d, raising or allaying the money will be found no help but
a hurt to the country, whatever our circumstances are. the others may
prove ineffectual.

’Tis thought our import and expence abroad this last year exceeded
our export by a very considerable sum, so to make the ballance equal
we must not only retrench equal to the money which was sent out last
year; but like-ways so much more as the want of that money, and of the
addition the bank made to our money may have lessen’d the yearly value.
so tho’ ’tis possible that coining the plate and regulating trade may
bring the ballance to our side, yet ’tis to be fear’d the consequences
will show that it is not very practicable; for that and other reasons
already given. however they may assist, but in regulating our import,
regard ought to be had that the sale of our goods abroad be no way
hindred, for if that is not taken care of, we shall lose more for
want of a market, than we shall save by importing less. and tho’ all
necessary care be taken, yet the assistance may reasonably be expected
from these measures, will not relieve us; they may keep us lingring in
the state we are, expos’d to confusion at home, and to insults from
abroad.

Most people think scarcity of money is only the consequence of a
ballance due; but ’tis the cause as well as the consequence, and the
effectual way to bring the ballance to our side, is to add to the money.

Our poor have been computed 200000, our people were then more than now,
but our poor may be as many as then; suppose only 100000, and by the
addition to our money 50000 of them were imployed, and only for one
half of the year, their labour to be payed 3 pence, and worth 3 pence
more to the imployer, their consumption a penny more than now: the
yearly value of the nation would be increas’d by such labour 189583
lib. 6 sh. and 8 pence.

If the country people about Perth and Stirling, have to the value of
20000 l. of linen, serges, and other manufacture more than is bought
up; tho’ these goods exported will yield 20 or 30 per cent. profit,
yet the owners can’t export them, the goods being in so many different
hands, and not having correspondents abroad to whom they could trust
the sale of them. A. B. and C. are satisfied for that profit to take
the trouble and hazard of exporting them, but money being scarce they
cannot get any to borrow, tho’ their security be good; nor cannot
well have credit for the goods from so many different people they are
strangers to. if they could have credit for them, yet these country
people must be idle till A. B. and C. pay them out of their returns
from abroad. so for want of money to exchange by, goods fall in value,
and manufacture decays.

It cannot well be known what sum will serve the occasions of the
nation, for as manufacture and trade advance, the demand for money will
increase; but the many poor we have always had, is a great presumption
we have never had money enough.

England has been computed to have had 14 millions in gold and silver,
and at the same time had paper-money for a great sum; yet England never
had money enough to imploy the people: 50 million would not improve
England so far as it is capable of improvement. if all the people
were then imployed and to the best advantage, more money would bring
more people from other countries. the province of Holland by a great
quantity of money, and numbers of people the consequence of much money,
is able to bear a share in the wars of Europe, equal to many times the
same number of acres of better land in England; yet Holland has not the
advantages for trade that England has. so that country that can have
money equal to the demand, will be more powerful than any other country
with the same advantages, whose money is less than the demand.

If money were given to a people in greater quantity than there was a
demand for, money would fall in its value; but if only given equal to
the demand, it will not fall in value.

At present perhaps 3 or 400000 lib. is more than there is a demand for;
but as trade and manufacture increase, the demand for money will be
greater.

What I have propos’d to supply the country with money, may be
reduc’d to this. if an estate of a 100 l. rent is worth 2000 l. in
silver-money, and this estate can be convey’d by paper, and this paper
be capable of being divided; then that estate may be made current money
for 2000 lib. and any person who receives such paper money, receives a
value equal to the same sum of silver money, as silver is valued now.
if it is coin’d for 15 years purchase, then that paper-money will be
more valuable than silver, for 1500 lib. in that paper will purchase
land worth 2000 lib. silver-money. if it is coin’d for 25 years
purchase, then that paper money will not be so valuable as silver, for
2000 lib. in silver will buy as much land as 2500 lib. in paper.

Since it is very practicable to make land money, it would be contrary
to reason to limit the industry of the people, by making it depend on a
species that is not in our power, but in the power of our enemies; when
we have a species of our own every way more qualified.

And considering the state of this country from the great scarcity of
money; that the value of lands fall, rents are unpayed, farms are
thrown upon the master’s hand, and the debitor’s person and estate
expos’d to the law, being engag’d to pay a species of which there is
scarce any in the nation.

2. The hazard the money’d man is in from the uncertainty of the value
of money, and the danger of confusion, in which case the money’d man
may lose all.

3. The low state of trade, that many of the people who depended on
trade and liv’d well, are starving or forc’d abroad.

4. That the other degrees of the people suffer in proportion.

5. That the nation in this condition may run into confusion, and is
expos’d to its enemies.

Considering the benefit the nation will have by this addition to the
money; that the land will be improv’d, so be more valuable, rents
be well payed, and that debitors by paying a value equal to what is
contracted for, may free their persons and estates from the danger they
are now exposed to.

2. That the money’d man will receive punctual payment, in a money of a
more certain value than silver or any other goods, and be in no danger
of confusion.

3. That trade will flourish, and these who depend on it be encouraged.

4. That the condition of the other degrees of the people will be
better’d.

5. That the nation will be able to maintain itself in order, and resist
its enemies.

These reasons considered, the question then will be, whether we will
improve the country as much as it is capable, without being at any
expence for a measure of trade, or continue as we are in hopes of
silver from other nations.

It will be a great advantage to this nation, that by the register we
are capable of putting this proposal in execution, and enjoying the
benefit of it; when other nations, tho’ they resolv’d upon it, would
for some years be incapable of it. tho’ for the general good of Europe
it were to be wish’d England were as capable of it as we are.

I have not had time to put my thoughts in that order they ought to have
been, and am forc’d to leave out answers I design’d to have given to
some objections I have heard made against this proposal; but if the
parliament think good to enter upon the consideration of it, I don’t
doubt but it may be made appear to be of great and certain advantage;
that it cannot possibly be any way hurtful to the country in general,
and that it may be so ordered, as not to be hurtful to any person, but
on the contrair.


                                FINIS.




          Books printed and sold by ROBERT and ANDREW FOULIS.


In pure Greek, on fine writing paper, in quarto,

  Homeri Ilias, 2 vols
  Æschylus
  Sophocles


With Latin translations in quarto,

  Æschylus, 2 vols
  Demetrius Phalereus de elocutione


In pocket volumes the following,

  Homeri Ilias, 2 vols
  Hippocratis Aphorismi
  Xenophontis de Agesilao rege oratio
  Pindari opera
  Anacreon
  Æschylus, 2 vols
  Sophocles, 2 vols
  Aristotelis poetica
  Demetrius Phalereus
  Xenophontis Hiero
  Theophrasti characteres
  Epictetus
  M. Antoninus
  Aristotelis de mundo
  Cebetis tabula cum notulis
  Lucretius
  Ciceronis opera omnia, 20 vols
  Horatius, editio altera
  Terentius

 Phaedrus

 Philosophiae moralis institutio compendiaria, auctore Fr. Hutcheson,
 editio 2da auctior

 Cornelii Nepotis vitae excellentium imperatorum; of the same size of
 page and type, with Cicero’s works

 Professor Hutcheson’s introduction to moral philosophy, translated
 from the Latin

 An essay on the composition and manner of writing of the ancients,
 particularly Plato, by J. Geddes Advocate

 The meditations of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, newly translated from
 the Greek, with notes, and a life of the author, 2d edition 2 vols

 Professor Leechman’s sermon on prayer, 4th edition

 ---- Sermon on the temper, character, and duty of a Minister, 5th
 edition

 Sir J. Davies on the immortality of the soul

 The Earl of Shaftesbury’s characteristicks and letters, 4 vols

 Dr. Henry More’s dialogues on the attributes and providence of God

 Sir T. More’s Utopia, translated by Bishop Burnet

 Milton’s Paradise regain’d, and miscellany poems

 Ramsay’s Gentle Shepherd, with the sangs

 Xenophon’s Hiero, translated from the Greek.

 De optimo reipublicae statu, deque nova insula Utopia, libri II.
 Auctore T. Moro, Angliae cancellario

 C. Julii Caesaris commentarii, of the same size of type and page with
 Cicero


In the press,

  C. Plinii Caecilii Secundi epistolarum libri X.
  Minucii Felicis Octavius




                          Transcriber’s Notes

Punctuation for the most part has been retained as it appears in the
original publication.

Page 7: “suplpy themselves” changed to “supply themselves”

Page 108: “becanse, the” changed to “because, the”

Page 118: “of the barely.” changed to “of the barley.”

Page 123: “regulat the prices” changed to “regulate the prices”

Page 144: “by the the prince” changed to “by the prince”

Page 151: “silver mone” changed to “silver money”

Page 159: “at Whisunday” changed to “at Whitsunday”

Page 164: “The paliament” changed to “The parliament”

Page 186: “were not remeeded” changed to “were not remedied”

Page 202: “but likwise” changed to “but likewise”

Page 216: “other rea” changed to “other reasons”

Page 225: “maintain itelf” changed to “maintain itself”

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MONEY AND TRADE
CONSIDERED ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
  works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you “AS-IS”, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
